LookingLooking
ForwardForward
KENNETH S. KEYES, JR. and JACQUE FRESCOKENNETH S. KEYES, JR. and JACQUE FRESCO


Dedicated to the youth of the world who must meet the challenge of the twenty-first century.

About the Authors
Kenneth S. Keyes, Jr., is a multi-faceted man. He attended Duke 
University and obtained a BA from, the University of Miami, 
majoring in psychology and minoring in music. His interests include 
art, symphonic music, yachting-he lives aboard a 71-foot yacht 
named Caprice and writing-he is the author of How to Develop 
Your Thinking Ability and How to Live Longer-Stronger-Slimmer. 
He has taught in the Evening Division of the University of Miami.
Jacque Fresco worked as an industrial designer for thirty years, 
designing all types of equipment from prefabricated houses to 
automobiles, electronic and medical equipment, human factors 
systems, and hundreds of commercial products and inventions. He has 
designed and patented such varying items as a radical aircraft wing 
structure patented by the USAAF and three-dimensional motion 
pictures not requiring the "use of viewers. Numerous articles and 
photographs have been published about his work in many magazines 
and newspapers. He has served as technical advisor in a number of 
motion pictures, including one of the first on space stations and a 
journey to the moon called Project Moon Base. He lives in Miami.


LOOKING FORWARD
by Kenneth S. Keyes, Jr. and Jacques Fresco
Looking forward is an imaginative and fascinating book in which the authors take you on a journey into the 
culture and technology of the twenty-first century. After an introductory section that discusses the "Things 
that Shape Your Future." you will explore the whys and wherefores of the unfamiliar, alarming, but 
exciting world of a hundred years from now.
You will see this society through the eyes of Scott and Hella, a couple of the next century. Their living 
quarters are equipped with a cybernator. a seemingly magical computer device, but one that is based on 
scientific principles now known. It regulates sleeping hours, communications throughout the world, an 
incredible underwater living complex, and even the daily caloric intake of the "young" couple. (They are in 
their forties but can expect to live 200 years.)
The world that Scott and Hella live in is a world that has achieved full weather control, has developed a 
finger-sized computer that is implanted in the brain of every baby at birth (and the babies are scientifically 
incubated the women of the twenty-first century need not go through the pains of childbirth), and that has 
perfected genetic manipulation that allows the human race to be improved by means of science.
Economically, the world is Utopian by our standards. Jobs, wages, and money have long since been 
phased out. Nothing has a price tag, and personal possessions are not needed. Nationalism has been 
surpassed, and total disarmament has been achieved; educational technology has made schools and 
teachers obsolete. The children learn by doing, and are independent in this friendly world by the time they 
are five.
The chief source of this greater society is the Correlation Center, "Corcen," a gigantic complex of 
computers that serves but never enslaves mankind. Corcen regulates production, communication, 
transportation and all other burdensome and monotonous tasks of the past. This frees men and women to 
achieve creative challenging experiences rather than empty lives of meaningless leisure.
Obviously this book is speculative, but it is soundly based upon scientific developments that are now 
known. And as the authors state:
"You will understand this book best if you are one who sees today only as a stepping stone between 
yesterday and tomorrow.
You will need a sensitivity to the injustices, lost opportunities for happiness, and searing conflicts that 
characterize our twentieth-century civilization. If your mind can weigh new ideas and evaluate them with 
insight, this book is for you.
"We have no crystal ball. ... We want you to feed our ideas into your own computer, so that you can find 
even better ideas that may play a part in molding the future of our civilization."

Designs and Illustrations by Jacque Fresco
South Brunswick and New York: A. S. Barnes and Company
London: Thomas Yoseloff Ltd
© 1969 by Kenneth S. Keyes, Jr. and Jacque Fresco
Library of Congress Catalogue Card Number: 68-27189
A. S. Barnes and Co., Inc.
Cranbury, New Jersey 08512
Thomas Yoseloff Ltd
108 New Bond Street
London W1Y OQX, England
SBN: 498 06752 1
Printed in the United States of America
Other Books by Kenneth S. Keyes, Jr.
Member of the Authors League of America
HOW TO DEVELOP YOUR THINKING ABILITY
HOW TO LIVE LONGER—STRONGER—SLIMMER

Contents
Acknowledgments
Part I. THINGS THAT SHAPE OUR FUTURE
1. The Leap from the Jungle
2. The Confusion of Our Times
3. Predicting the Future
4. Our Values Chart Our Course
5. The Scientific Method
6. Cybernated Technology
7. Away We Go!
Part II. A PROJECTION OF OUR FUTURE
8. At Home in the Twenty-first Century
9. A Multi-Dimensional Life
10. Designing the New Generation
11. A Visit to Corcen
12. The Cultural Center
13. The Cybernated Industrial Complex
14. The Limitless Frontiers of Space
15. The New Personality
Part III. LOOKING FORWARD
16.Education for Change

Acknowledgments
The authors are indebted to countless people for the ideas and encouragement that have made this book 
possible. Most of those who reviewed the manuscript felt that these enormous changes in man and his 
environment might happen in 1,000 years but not in the next century as we suggest. The authors, 
however, have wondered whether the future society they describe may be partially in existence by the 
time the book is published. We see so many of our predictions of things to come being discussed, 
developed and tried that we suspect we have been too conservative in estimating the time.
The following kind friends have read the manuscript and offered excellent suggestions—some of which 
were used: Anne Ammirati, John Bethea, Louise Boches, Janice Burr, Charles Kimball, Shirley Lewis, 
William A. McCall, Gretchen McCall, Graham Miller, Joe Prospero, Charles Ray, Christie Ray, Arden 
Richards, Velma Richards, Marjofie Sherrill, and Anitra Thor- haug. We are indebted to Herbert Wallach, 
Jr., for suggesting our title—Looking Forward. Bonita Bennett listened to these "far-out" ideas, typed them 
studiously, and still had the stamina to assist greatly in editing and revising. Shirley Rosichan offered 
many excellent editorial suggestions. Others who helped with various phases of the work were Marty 
Costello, Karen Brandt, and Stephanie Brovold. Frank Seldon and Carl Green tirelessly assisted in 
reproducing copies of the manuscript. Also thanks to Iván García who helped digitalizing the paperbook 
trough OCR. Our thanks are also due to the authors and publishers who have kindly given permission to 
quote from their works.
Kenneth S. Keyes, Jr.
Jacque Fresco
Miami, Florida

PART I
THINGS THAT SHAPE OUR FUTURE
1.The Leap from the Jungle
The lives of most men and women are blighted by problems they cannot solve. And people usually blame 
themselves, or they blame "fate" whatever that is. However, when two cars collide at an intersection, 
should we, as students of society, concentrate our attention on the individual blame of the drivers, on 
"fate" or on the way transportation is engineered so that it permits collisions?
If you believe that cars and roads should be designed so that it is almost impossible for people to lose 
their lives through collisions, this book is for you. If you believe that the mind is capable of gradually 
applying the method of patient, scientific investigation to find out how to rearrange the structure of our 
society to give each individual a greater opportunity for self-realization and happiness while he is on earth, 
we welcome and need your help.
If you believe it's about time for the human race to stop spinning its wheels, then let's get going!
But this book on the future of our civilization is not for everyone. Few will be able to read it without forming 
an opinion before they see the picture as a whole. To enjoy this book you will have to blend open-
mindedness with critical skepticism. It is hard enough to face the problems of our own time. And it is many 
times more difficult to understand a projection of fantastic and shocking changes that may occur over the 
next hundred years!
Suppose an intelligent man in New York City around 1860 had sat down one evening with a book 
predicting life a century later.
He would have refused to believe that almost everyone in 1960 would be able to own a horseless carriage 
that could whisk about at 60 or more miles per hour. With his Victorian attitudes he would have been 
deeply shocked by the brief bikinis. In 1860, not even a "woman of ill repute" would have appeared so 
undressed in public. He would have smiled smugly at the ridiculous prediction that man-made flying 
machines would travel faster than the speed of sound. The thought of sending pictures and sounds 
through miles of air would have seemed impossible to a sensible person in 1860. It would have been 
incredible to him that the art of war would progress to the point where one small bomb would destroy a 
city. Our Victorian would have been alarmed that a part of his wages could be withheld to provide for 
retirement. At this point, let us leave this gentleman of the last century muttering to himself about loss of 
freedom and the world's moving too fast.
Are we more flexible—more farsighted—today? We will need to become experts at changing our minds. 
The differences between the nineteenth and twentieth centuries will probably be small when compared 
with the accelerating pace of the next century.

You will understand this book best if you see today as only a stepping stone between yesterday and 
tomorrow. You will need a sensitivity to the injustices, lost opportunities for happiness, and searing 
conflicts that characterize our twentieth-century civilization. If your mind can weigh new ideas and 
evaluate them with insight, this book is for you.
We have no crystal ball that gives an accurate picture of the twenty-first century. We want you to feed our 
ideas into your own computer. Perhaps you may find even better ideas that may play a part in molding the 
future of our civilization. In the next six chapters we'll explore the "why" and "wherefore" of the unfamiliar, 
alarming, unbelievable, wonderful, and exciting picture we will paint of the twenty-first century. Then we'll 
join Scott and Hella, who live in the next century. We'll experience with them the new dimensions of life in 
the changed world of the future.
The Long Journey
To understand the probable courses of man's future development, let's spend a few minutes looking into 
his past. The world came into existence around four and one-half billion years ago, and all sorts of weird 
fishes and monstrous dinosaurs got into the act before we did. Millions of years ago our ancestors were 
little apelike fellows that spent most of their time in trees. Then some of these little beasts began to do 
things that were to make a lot of difference to you and me. They quit jumping from branch to branch like 
the squirrels and, instead, began swinging from limb to limb somewhat like the man on the flying trapeze. 
This led to some important changes from head to toe. The arms, which previously moved in a restricted 
arc, developed free rotation.
This makes it possible for a baseball pitcher to whirl his arms around and zing one over home plate. The 
intestinal organs, which had been slung from the backbone, as in a dog, were now supported by the 
pelvis, which became somewhat bowl-shaped.
The front feet didn't have to support the weight of the body anymore, and they developed into a bunch of 
skyhooks that we call fingers. Since animals that misjudged distances when swinging from branch to 
branch left fewer offspring, we are blessed today with excellent stereoscopic vision and neuro-muscular 
co-ordination. We owe a large part of what we are today to our swinging primate ancestors.
Man has made three big steps away from his animal cousins. The first cultural jump occurred when he 
began to use fire, tools, and language. Although men of our own species, Homo sapiens, have been here 
about 50,000 years, radioactive carbon datings show that our ancestors were using tools and fire as much 
as 600,000 years ago.
The beginnings of language probably occurred several hundred thousand years ago. This was a 
tremendous leap forward. The development of language may have played a part in helping us be as 
intelligent as we are today. Suppose someone had yelled, "Watch out for the tiger in the tree behind you!" 
The more intelligent ones would have got the message fast. They probably charmed the greater number 
of females that evening and, thus, left more offspring.

The second big cultural jump taken by our ancestors occurred about 7,500 years ago. This was the 
discovery of how to raise food. The development of agriculture and animal-raising made it possible for us 
to live in crowded nests known as cities. When man had to gather his food in the form of fleeing animals 
and random plants, it took a lot of land to support a small group.
For example, there were probably not over 100,000 people on the entire continent of Europe before they 
learned to raise food.
A good year might have increased the birth rate. But they would soon have been killed off by famine and 
disease if there were even one rough year when the game and plants were less available.
When man began to raise food, he could stay in one place instead of roaming all over the countryside. 
Socially and technologically, lots of things began to happen for the first time. He began to accumulate 
bric-a-brac. The wheel was developed. He learned how to heat metals to make them soft so that they 
could be poured or beaten into useful shapes. He developed the plow for working the land and the loom 
for weaving cloth. Social patterns that were needed in city life were developed. He amplified political 
structures and created armies equipped with death-dealing instruments. Within a thousand years after our 
ancestors acquired the know-how for raising food, the cultural patterns of city life, politics, business, and 
technology were invented. Since then they have continued with very little change until recently.
Many anthropologists consider the city as our most fundamental social invention. The first cities evolved 
in southwestern Asia, and the pattern of the city was well worked out in Mesopotamia by 4,500 to 4,000 
B.C. Cities did not appear in China until around 2,000 B.C. Europe had to wait until the Greeks put 
together a few cities around 900 to 800 B.C. The city did not appear in Scandinavia until after 1,000 A.D.
Writing developed almost simultaneously, about 5,000 to 6,000 years ago, in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and 
the Indus Valley. The Chinese invented their cumbersome symbols 2,000 years later. When a man's 
thoughts were written, they could speak out after his death. The human race began to accumulate 
information that permitted the building of a modern civilization with a complex value system.
Whereas learning was previously a monopoly of a privileged class, the development of the alphabet 
eventually made it possible for everyone to acquire an education. All alphabets now in use seem to stem 
from a single point of origin in the Sinai Peninsula where the Egyptians were busy mining. Most of the 
time the Egyptians used criminals and prisoners of war for this type of work. Occasionally, some 
wandering Semites who needed food came to work for them. Since they were pretty smart fellows, the 
sheiks of the Semites were appointed foremen of the mines.
As part of their job they drew up reports on how much metal was mined and how much money was 
earned by the various men.
From the complicated Egyptian system of writing, these foremen abstracted the simple symbols 
representing single sounds in the Egyptian system. We are indebted to them for giving us the first 
alphabet.
We were doing business as usual by at least 3,000 B.C. Standard weights and measures were in use in 
Sumeria. Barley was one of the earliest mediums of exchange. A measure for barley was available for 

public use in the market place. If a farmer had felt he was being gypped, he could have walked over and 
measured it out. By 3,000 B.C. convenient metal coins began to be used in place of the more awkward 
sacks of barley, and a shortage of money became a continual problem for the government. The Code of 
Hammurabi set the value ratio of barley and metal. This code provided serious penalties for anyone 
caught cheating. To make sure this money system would work, a merchant could have been put to death 
if he had refused to accept either barley or coins in payment for his merchandise.
There are cuneiform records of loans with interest that ran as high as 300 per cent when an individual 
could not offer security.
Even the lowest rate was 25 per cent per year. The Sumerians worked out business methods such as 
stock companies and corporations. Many tablets recording their business deals and their private 
correspondence have survived. One tablet dated before 2000 B.C. describes the complaint of an old man 
about the degeneracy of the younger generation. Another tablet is from a boy at school telling his parents 
about the "lousy food."
The late Ralph Linton , a noted American anthropologist, wrote:
Many of the economic and social patterns which still operate in modern Western society can be 
traced to this region. It has been said that if George Washington had been transported back to the 
court of Hammurabi of Babylon, about 2067-2025 B.C., he would have felt vastly more at home 
there than he would in the modern capital city which bears his name. Apart from language 
difficulties, he would have encountered very few things in Hammurabi's empire which were not 
familiar and understandable, while in Washington he would have been baffled and confused by the 
tremendous technological changes . . .
and the fumbling efforts which our society is making to bring the other aspects of its culture into 
adjustment with these.*
* (The Tree of Culture (New York: Alfred A. Knopf,1959), p. 298.)
The third enormous step in the development of human culture took place when we began to supplement 
the puny muscles of human beings and animals with other sources of power. The use of sails on boats 
eventually replaced galley slaves. Water power was used to carry things downstream. The water wheel 
furnished power to run mills. Later, steam power replaced even more human muscles. During the last 
hundred years we learned to manufacture large amounts of electrical energy. Then things began to hum 
because this made energy or power available at any point to which we could run a wire or lug a generator.
From a modern point of view one of the most useful measures of the development of a civilization is the 
amount of available energy per person. To a large extent the degree of physical comfort that you enjoy 
today is correlated with the energy that is at your disposal.
The application of the scientific method of thinking has made it possible to develop almost unlimited 
amounts of energy. This energy may be in the form of electricity which will run a constellation of labor-
saving and life-enriching appliances and instruments. It may be in the form of coal, gasoline, oil, or 
nuclear power. It may be in chemical form, such as in an automobile battery or a flashlight cell. Imagine 

the almost complete paralysis that would occur if your electricity and gasoline supply were cut off, and you 
had to use your own muscles in place of the complex of machines upon which you now rely.
Our Rapidly Evolving Civilization
We are today but a few steps from the jungle. While we've been trying to get away from the animal 
patterns of the jungle for a little over a half-million years, we really got moving only a few thousand years 
ago with the development of cities and the invention of writing. It has just been in the last century that we 
have started the large scale use of non-muscular sources of energy and power. Most factory workers 
today are laboring in industries that were not even in existence in 1900. Although our world may in some 
ways appear stable to us, we are in a furious transitional phase in which changes are occurring at the 
fastest rate in history.
Today we are at the beginning of this third phase of the development of our civilization. Fantastic 
developments lie ahead.
If life at times seems bewildering, if you feel pulled in many directions, if you find that no matter what you 
do, you still have sticky problems, if you find that our economic, political, and social ways of doing things 
sometimes create more difficulties than they solve, then you are simply playing your part in suffering 
through the present transitional phase of our civilization.
Much of your life is patterned along the lines used in western Asia several thousand years ago. Yet, some 
of the conditions to which you are trying to adjust have come out of the laboratory in the last few decades. 
If the day-by-day pattern of your personal, business, and social life is something less than serene, you've 
been caught in the wringer of change, and you've got lots of company.
2.The Confusion of Our Times
The habit patterns of men and women that may have been appropriate several thousand years ago 
cannot be made to yield maximum happiness in the changed world of today—to say nothing of the future 
civilization toward which we are rapidly evolving. This chapter will briefly catalogue some of the things that 
keep us frustrated, insecure, and jumpy. As might be expected in a time of rapid transition, few of the 
basic needs of men and women are now met in a satisfying way. We hope you will bear with us as we 
haul out some of the dirt that usually stays lumpily under the rug.
Among the hangovers from the past, we might list the grisly pattern of war. Back in Mesopotamia a war 
might have chewed up a few thousand people. The First World War killed approximately ten million 
people of whom 5 per cent were civilians. But that's only the beginning. The Second World War rolled up 
a death toll five times as large—approximately fifty million. About 50 per cent were civilians.

Suppose there were no police and no laws in your city. Who would be safe? Criminals might like it. But 
not you and your family. Similarly, the lack of a respected and enforced international law between nations 
endangers everyone on earth today. It's like living in a jungle.
General Eisenhower has summed up the tragic effects of the custom of war as a method of settling 
disputes between nations:
 ... a life of perpetual fear and tension; a burden of arms draining the wealth and the labor of all 
peoples; a wasting of strength that defies the American system or the Soviet system or any system 
to achieve true abundance and happiness for the peoples of this earth . . .
 Every gun that is made, every warship launched, every rocket fired signifies, in the final sense, a 
theft from those who hunger and are not fed, those who are cold and are not clothed.
This world in arms is not spending money alone.
 It is spending the sweat of its laborers, the genius of its scientists, the hopes of its children.
 The cost of one modern heavy bomber is this:
 A modern brick school in more than 30 cities.
 It is two electric power plants, each serving a town of 60,000 population.
 It is two fine, fully equipped hospitals.
 It is some 50 miles of concrete highway.
 We pay for a single fighter plane with a half a million bushels of wheat.
 We pay for a single destroyer with new homes that could have housed more than 8,000 
people . . .
 This is not a way of life at all, in any true sense. Under the cloud of threatening war, it is humanity  
hanging from a cross of iron.
When Bertrand Russell, world famous philosopher, participated at the age of ninety in a big peace 
demonstration in London in 1962, he was arrested and sent to jail for a week! It seemed that he wanted to 
change some of our habit patterns. He wished to end nuclear bomb testing, get rid of all nuclear weapons, 
and abolish the institution of organized murder that we call "war".
Economic Insecurity
In spite of our program of so-called "social security," both personal and economic insecurity are usual in 
our time. Few people can be sure of continued employment. In many cases one can not be sure that the 
business that employs him will be in existence a year from now. Often, one can not be sure that the type 
of work for which he has been trained will be in demand next year. Automation is eliminating hundreds of 
thousands of jobs each year in the United States.
 We are quite ingenious in building factories that can turn out enormous quantities of television sets, 
automobiles, refrigerators, toothbrushes, packaged foods, etc. But we wouldn't dare let these factories run 
full time because they would produce more goods than we could sell. So we have idle factories some of 

the time with large numbers of people in need all of the time. Paradoxically, it seems that only when we're 
fighting a war are we able to keep our industrial machines operating at full capacity. Although much of our 
population can use better clothing, better housing, and better food, our techniques in distributing the 
bounty of mass production are bogged down by economic diseases that go under the names of 
"overpopulation," "unemployment," and "lack of purchasing power."
Dr. Ralph Linton has observed:
As the disharmonies within the culture become increasingly pronounced, more and more of the  
society's energy and resources have to be expended on makeshift adjustments until the period of 
rapid change gradually grinds to a halt. Our own society would seem to be in such a period at the 
present time. Its tremendous and still accelerating development of science and technology has not 
been accompanied by an equal development in social, economic, and political patterns . . . We are 
now . . . only beginning to explore the potentialities which it offers for developments in our culture 
outside technology, particularly in the social, political, and economic fields. It is safe to predict that 
even two or three centuries from now, such social inventions as modern-type Capitalism, Fascism, 
and Communism will be regarded as primitive experiments directed toward the adjustment of  
modern society to modern technology.*
* Linton, The Tree of Culture (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1959), pp.47-8.
Our Polluted World
Although this is the only world we have, we're certainly not taking good care of it. We've already exploded 
enough atomic bombs to contaminate the atmosphere with strontium 90 and other radioactive elements. 
According to Hathaway and Leverton of the U.S. Department of Agriculture:
Strontium 90 . . . may become a health problem. Its radioactivity is slow to disappear, and its  
accumulation in the body could be dangerous. . . . Strontium 90 was first detected in animal bones,  
dairy products, and soil in 1953. It now occurs in all human beings regardless of their age or where 
they live.*
* Milicent L. Hathaway and Ruth M. Leverton, "Calcium and Phosphorous," Food, The Yearbook o/  
Agriculture, 1959 (United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C., 1959), p. 117.
Atomic bombs are not the only means we use to pollute the air we breathe. The exhausts of automobiles, 
the excretions of industry, and the burning of coal, oil, and garbage are also busy contaminating the air. 
Today air pollution affects in some degree more than 7,000 urban areas inhabited by 115,000,000 
Americans. When bituminous coal and low grade fuel oil are burned, sulphur dioxide gas and smoke are 
released. A five-day killer smog hit London in 1952 and killed 4,000 people. Air pollution has been linked 
with the common cold, asthma, pneumonia, tuberculosis, influenza, chronic bronchitis, pulmonary 
emphysema, and lung cancer.

Those who are not overly worried about human beings might well ponder other costs of air pollution. 
Sulphur dioxide has been shown to disintegrate nylon stockings. It reacts chemically with moisture to form 
sulphuric acid, which eats away roofs, eaves, downspouts, and other exposed metals. It even affects 
stone buildings and the proud statutes of military heroes in the parks.
Air and water are the most immediate physical necessities of life. Lest we neglect the latter, it may be 
pointed out that our largest river is well polluted with oils, phenols, ammonia and toxic metals, blood, 
refuse from hospitals and undertakers, and acids from mines. For example, in the St. Louis area there 
have been times when the chicken feathers, viscera, and offal collect in patches too thick to drive a 
motorboat through. The 300,000,000 gallons of sewage a day coming from St. Louis and East St. Louis 
contain 460 tons of solid garbage and 165 tons of ground garbage. In the part of the Mississippi from St. 
Louis to New Orleans, a mouthful of water contains half a million coliform bacilli, which come largely from 
untreated sewage. Nor does the United States have a monopoly on polluted water. Throughout the world 
about five million children die each year before their first birthday from diarrhea or dysentery through 
drinking unclean water.
Ephemeral Machines
The pleasure of living in the twentieth century is somewhat tarnished by the constant deterioration of the 
machines and gadg ets we use. They are, unfortunately, designed for a short life— both style-wise and 
function-wise. It is possible to build a washing machine or television set that would probably not need 
service during a ten-year period. It is possible to design an automobile that may remain trouble-free for a 
ten-year period and to give it an attractive design that would be appreciated even longer. Instead of 
designing for longevity and service, automobile designers rack their brains for ways to make next year's 
car so appealing that we'll trade in this year's car. Gerald Piel informs us:
According to the standard practice of our durable goods industries—always with the aim of 
perpetuating scarcity in the face of abundance—the automobile is designed for 1,000 hours of 
service, to be traded in at 40,000 miles or less.
Can you think of any electrical or mechanical device in your home that will remain trouble-free for a long 
period? There is only one device in your home that is designed to last about twenty years. It is likely that it 
won't require service during this time. And you don't even own it! Although it is a complicated electronic 
instrument, you can drop it on the floor, and it probably won't break. Whether you use it once a day or 
continuously throughout the day, it does not seem to wear out. The reason it was designed to give at least 
two decades of trouble-free service is that it was not made to be sold. The company that rents it to you 
would have to repair it at their own expense if something were to go wrong. So they make sure that this 
complex device is engineered to high standards. They can't make money if it breaks down every few 
months. In case you haven't guessed the name of this one thing in your home that has been engineered 
to give you maximum utility and minimum maintenance, it is the telephone! It is designed for trouble-free 
use, not for cheap production at a profit. How wonderful it is to realize that there are ways to get off the 
treadmill of buy it, use it, junk it, and buy it again!

Standing Room Only
Overpopulation of the world is a twentieth-century problem. It took until about Ï800 for us to spawn a world 
population of one billion. Current predictions indicate that the present population of three and one-third 
billion will explode to seven billion by the end of this century and to sixteen billion by the year 2040 if the 
growth rate is not changed.
This enormous growth in population in many areas of the world is greatly exceeding the ability of most 
countries to provide food and decent living standards. The FAO World Food Survey of 1963 found that at 
least 60 per cent of the people in the under-developed areas were undernourished and that half of the 
world suffers from hunger, or malnutrition, or both. In Africa, Latin America, and the Far East, food 
production is growing only two-thirds as fast as the population. In the latter two areas the per capita food 
production is still below the levels attained twenty-five years ago ! Eugene R. Black, former president of 
the World Bank, has summed it up in this way:
I must be blunt. Population growth threatens to nullify all our effort to raise living standards in many  
of the poorer countries. We are coming to a situation in which the optimist will be the man who  
thinks present living standards can be maintained.
Cultural Dilemmas
Most of the built-in dilemmas that face human beings in our fast-changing world pose problems for which 
the wisdom of the past offers no effective solutions. In so many ways we're like a man chased to the edge 
of a cliff by a roaring lion. If he jumps, he'll be hurt. And if he stays there, the lion's going to get him. For 
example, we have built-in sexual drives that become strong in the teen years. Marriage may seem to offer 
a solution. Yet, the marriage counselors advise us that early marriages have a greater rate of divorce—
that a person needs to experience life and achieve a degree of maturity before choosing a life partner.The 
individual suffers no matter how he tries to solve the problem. If a person has an active sex life before 
marriage, the mores of our tribe may load him with feelings of guilt. If an unmarried person denies his 
need for sexual expression, he may enjoy a culturally-clean conscience, but he will be fighting a 
constantly stimulated, deep need that has been structured into his body. Guilt feelings may still arise from 
vivid sexual fantasies, erotic dreams, or masturbation. No matter what choice a person makes in this 
situation, it is usually accompanied by conflict and doubt. Not only in matters of sex, but in most business, 
personal, and social matters we are confronted with countless dilemmas. Our present folkways make it 
difficult to achieve effective solutions that deeply contribute to human dignity and happiness.
On the Homefront

"The mass of men," said Thoreau, "lead lives of quiet desperation."
 The lives of most people in our present civilization fall far short of fulfilling levels of serenity and 
happiness. Ann Landers, a newspaper columnist, who deals with personal problems received this 
poignant letter:
Dear Ann Landers :
 How do you feel after reading a couple of hundred letters? Disenchanted, I'll bet.
 When I look back at my own life, its problems and its failures, I wonder what is it all about?
 Then I look at my children and what has happened to their lives. Dear God, I tried. He knows I 
tried. But where did I fail? I must have failed. I am their mother.
 The children went to church and Sunday School. They earned Bibles for perfect attendance and 
they had love. But here is the record :
 One married while in the Air Force. Five years later—debt, drinking, divorce. Two children, two 
unhappy pawns. Remarriage out of the church. More debts.
 Our daughter, desperately in love in high school, married to a fine but sick man. Willing but unable 
to work. Debts, then death.
 A new love? She thought so, but her second marriage was a poor one. Where will it end? Heaven 
only knows. . . .
The lives of not-so-quiet desperation of many people are reflected in another letter received by Ann 
Landers.
Dear Ann:
Our five children are in bed and I am looking at a huge basket of clothes that I should be ironing, 
but I'm writing this letter to you instead.
I'm so exhausted if I walked past the bed and looked at it I'd fall asleep standing up.
My husband is a wonderful person and a terrific father. He doesn't drink or gamble and wouldn't 
think of spending a dime on himself. He always puts me and the children first. He works hard at his 
job, but every week they take something out of his paycheck. I don't think we'll ever be a dollar 
ahead.In 18 years this house will be paid for, and then it will probably fall apart.
The kids, God love them, are wonderful. They help me by doing for themselves and by just being 
good. Never do I hear a complaint because they have to wear their cousin's hand-me-downs or 
because there is no money for treats or Scout uniforms.
If I could get my hair done in a beauty shop and eat dinner out once in a while I'd think I was in  
heaven. Is this what life was meant to be?
Tired
Ann Landers began her reply, "Only if you're lucky. . . ." *
* Reprinted by permission of Ann Landers and Hall Publisher's Syndicate.

The Quandary of Women
It is quite possible that most women in our rapidly changing civilization have a rougher time of it than men. 
A woman who lived on a farm two centuries ago was deeply needed and felt secure. She and her home 
were the center of vocation, recreation, and education. Although she worked hard, she was psychlogically 
secure in her own feeling of worth. She was confident of the great need which she supplied in the lives of 
her husband and children. Today, household gadgets have relieved woman of some of the work, but the 
secure emotional foundations of her life have been largely swept away. The home is no longer the place 
where the family makes its living. Factories and offices beckon the father to a world of business not 
shared by the rest of his family. Schools grab up the children and take over the responsibility for 
educating them—frequently, in a way that is quite different from the training of the parents. Although 
television has added to the recreational aspect of modern homes, most of the really exciting things 
happen away from home. Automobiles scatter the family in all directions, and the home is often used 
primarily as a hotel in which to eat and sleep.
The modern housewife is expected to be a fascinating and energetic companion to her husband. She 
must meet the endless needs of her children. And at the same time she must operate the household, 
including food-gathering at the grocery store. In addition to these three full-time occupations which stretch 
her out pretty thin, she should find time to develop her own mind and body, including frequent trips to the 
beauty salon. After a number of years of this tearing in every direction, most wives begin to feel that, "Life 
is passing me by." They begin to question their self-worth. They realize that they are needed less and less 
by their husbands and children. Unhappiness, divorce, suicide bitterness, and blighted personalities are 
often the consequences of our rapidly changing culture.
In the United States there are currently around four million divorces a year that affect about a third of a 
million children mostly under ten years of age. Divorce statistics themselves are not important, but the 
painful bickering, searing accusations, and damaged egos that lead to a divorce greatly affect the total 
sum of human happiness.
When a woman tries to live a fuller life in the world outside her home, the path is not smooth. Dr. Ruth B. 
Kundsin, a prominent Harvard bacteriologist, said:
It is my contention that women in the United States have been victims of both prejudice and 
discrimination. . . If she has a sprinkling of Harlowian traits, her male colleagues are flirtatious. If 
she looks like a benevolent moose, they are merciless and their appraisal of her appearance takes 
precedence over what she has to say.
Dr. Kundsin would have us consider the enjoyment of living with a happy, independent woman who 
is utilizing her talents completely and arrives home with sparkling, challenging expertenees of her 
own to tell and share. . . . Couldn't it be that the love of such a woman is a wondrous, exciting  
experience? Or does the American male ego really need a female slave in residence?

Just in case it's beginning to look as though only the women have a rough time of it, there's a tragedy in 
the monotonous, routine-filled hours by which most men earn their living. Spending most of the prime 
years of one's life fighting to earn an existence severely limits the self-realization and happiness of most 
men. The world is so full of exciting things to learn, of interesting places to travel, of countless creative 
hobbies, of body-building sports, and of lovely sunsets and natural beauty that one must wistfully sigh at 
our limited opportunity to experience the best things in life.
A Hornet's Nest of Problems
In this chapter we have briefly touched on some of the problems of our confused civilization that scream 
the loudest for solutions. It would be possible to write several books just describing the "hangovers" of our 
transitional civilization. Take a deep breath because we haven't covered even a hundredth of the 
problems of the present. Help us fill out the long, long list:
The failure to apply scientific methods to solve social problems; the thousands of insidious types of 
prejudice and prejudice-inspired violence and killing; the hollowness of so much of family and 
social life; a competitive life pattern that makes it difficult for us to give fellow humans the deep 
acceptance that their egos need so much; the failure of men to cooperate in joining hands over 
national boundaries to build a civilization in which all men may be happier, the failure to seek and 
utilize the abilities of geniuses, the shortage of good teachers; schools that indoctrinate in what to 
think instead of teaching how to think; the unfortunate attitude that education stops when 
"schooling" is over; the failure of 40 per cent of our young people to finish high school; the 
restlessness of our adolescent population; drug addiction; the problem of abortion; mental illness; 
the failure of prisons to rehabilitate; the growing crime rate; slums that mar our beauty and 
disgrace our humanity; a countryside made ugly with shoddy stores, screaming signs, and 
junkyards; the primitive automotive systems which kill over 40,000 people each year; the high rate 
of all kinds of accidents that kill one person in the United States every six minutes and injure 
someone every three seconds; the difficulty of consumers in getting reliable information on 
products because of advertising that exaggerates little differences; the competitive system in which 
one man's success in business may throw three into the tragedy of bankruptcy; unemployment; the 
insecurity of men and women in the forty to sixty-five age range who have difficulty in finding well-
paying, dignified employment; price-fixing; industrial strikes; the squeeze on the small 
businessman; monopoly; the graft of politicians and the hypocrisy of lawmakers; high taxes; senior 
citizens, restless in retirement; unscientific tampering with our land, resulting in floods, dust storms,  
and the loss of valuable forests; the fertile acres wasted in the growth of tobacco that is detrimental  
to the health of mankind; water shortage that hampers agriculture and industry:
the use of pesticides in ways that injure people and kill wildlife; agricultural practices and 
processing techniques that result in low quality foods; choosing foods by taste and habit instead of 
by vitamin-mineral-protein-unsaturated fat content; immature personalities reinforced by the 
deficiencies of television, radio, and motion pictures; the prevalence of inadequate values based 
on wealth and social prestige, which seldom bring happiness when achieved; and the list may go 
on and on and on.

The purpose of this book is to show how the mind and heart of man can solve these apparently 
"unsolvable" problems. The readers of this book may be "pioneers" in a deeply significant way when the 
long-range story of civilization is written.
3.Predicting the Future
At every point in history [warns Dr. George Gallup] man has assumed that civilization has reached 
its zenith. He has smugly refused to place himself on a scale of time that reaches thousands and 
millions of years into the future as well as into the past. Looked at from the vantage point of 8,000 
years hence—approximately the period of recorded history—man's progress up to the present time 
may appear far less impressive than it does today.*
* George Gallup, The Miracle Ahead (New York, Evanston, and London: Harper & Row, 1964), p.  
ix.
We have been here such a short time that we could almost be called "newborn." If you were to use a 
twenty-four hour clock to represent the time since life began on earth, it would show that man has only 
been in existence since the last minute of the twenty-fourth hour; only during the last few seconds of the 
last minute has modern man begun to use scientific methods to lead him to the most effective ways to get 
things done. We are just now beginning to hit our stride. More new knowledge has been created during 
the twentieth century than in the previous billion years. Change is everywhere.
How does one go about predicting the most probable changes in man's future? One might at first think 
that scientists could give us worthwhile information on the future. They're busy hammering out the next 
step. They're running experiments to find out what works and what doesn't. They're patiently sifting facts 
and theories that form the stepping stones to the future. But a glance at the record shows that few 
scientists have been able to anticipate future developments correctly. They have often been woefully 
wrong in giving opinions on the probability of events even a decade in the future.
About eighty years ago Thomas Edison, after his brilliant success with the phonograph and carbon 
microphone, became interested in using electricity to make light. When the news of this got around, the 
securities of the gas companies began to drop. The British Parliament appointed a committee to 
investigate the possibility of developing an electric light. The concensus of the experts was that Edison's 
ideas were, "good enough for our transatlantic friends . . . but unworthy of the attention of practical or 
scientific men."
C. D. Darlington the brilliant English geneticist said:
It is no accident that bacteria were first seen under the microscope by a draper, . . . that oxygen  
was first isolated by a Unitarian minister, that the theory of infection was first established by a 
chemist, the theory of heredity by a man who was unfitted to be a university instructor in either 
Botany or Zoology.

At the beginning of this century, most scientists unanimously agreed that an airplane was probably 
impossible, and, even if it worked, it was impractical. The eminent American astronomer Simon Newcomb 
declared with finality:
The demonstration that no possible combination of known substances, known forms of machinery 
and known forms of force, can be united in a practical machine by which man shall fly long 
distances through the air, seems to the writer as complete as it is possible for the demonstration of  
any physical fact to be.
Fortunately, the Wright brothers did not have time to worry about Newcomb's conclusions. They were too 
busy bolting a gasoline engine onto some wings in their bicycle shop in Dayton. Here's what William H. 
Pickering, a well-known scientist, had to say after the Wright brothers had flown their airplane at Kitty 
Hawk:
The popular mind often pictures gigantic flying machines speeding across the Atlantic and carrying 
innumerable passengers in a way analogous to our modern steamships. ... It seems safe to say  
that such ideas must be wholly visionary, and even if a machine could get across with one or two 
passengers the expense would be prohibitive to any but the capitalist who could own his own 
yacht.
Another popular fallacy is to expect enormous speed to be obtained. It must be remembered that  
the resistance of the air increases as the square of the speed and the work as the cube.... If with 
30 h.p. we can now attain a speed of 40 m.p.h., then in order to reach a speed of 100 m.p.h. we 
must use a motor capable of 470 h.p. ... it is clear that with our present devices there is no hope of 
competing for racing speed with either our locomotives or our automobiles.
Scientists may have struck out when it came to airplanes, but they had another chance to improve their 
batting average on predictions as the rocket age approached. In spite of the pioneering researches of 
American Robert Goddard and the Romanian Hermann Oberth, who outlined in detail the basic 
technology of rockets and spaceships, Professor A. W. Bickerton in 1926 wrote:
This foolish idea of shooting at the moon is an example of the absurd length to which vicious 
specialization will carry scientists working in thought-tight compartments. Let us critically examine 
the proposal. For a projectile entirely to escape the gravitation of the earth, it needs a velocity of 7  
miles a second. The thermal energy of a gramme at this speed is 15,180 calories. . . . The energy  
of our most violent explosive—nitroglycerine—is less than 1,500 calories per gramme. 
Consequently, even had the explosive nothing to carry, it has only one-tenth of the energy 
necessary to escape the earth. . . . Hence the proposition appears to be basically impossible. . . .

During the last few months of World War II, the Germans surprised the world with a V-2 rocket, which they 
fired from the Continent to England. This naturally raised the possibility that an intercontinental missile 
might be built which could he fired in Europe to destroy American cities. Dr. Vannevar Bush, who was 
head of the United States scientific war effort, testified before a Senate Committee on December 3, 1945:
There has been a great deal said about a 3,000 miles high-angle rocket. In my opinion such a 
thing is impossible for many years. The people who have been writing these things that annoy me, 
have been talking about a 3,00U mile high-angle rocket shot from one continent to another, 
carrying an atomic bomb and so directed as to be a precise weapon which would land exactly on a 
certain target, such as a city. I say, technically, I don't think anyone in the world knows how to do 
such a thing, and I feel confident that it will not be done for a very long period of time to come. ... I 
think we can leave that out of our thinking. I wish the American public would leave that out of their 
thinking.
Slightly over a decade after this expert delivered his words of wisdom, there were intercontinental missiles 
in actual production, and the Russians had Sputnik I orbiting the earth ! Arthur C. Clarke in his excellent 
book Profiles of the Future (and to whom we are indebted for the examples of predictions given in this 
chapter) wrote:
Too great a burden of knowledge can clog the wheels of imagination; I have tried to embody this 
fact of observation in Clarke's Law, which may be formulated as follows:
When a distinguished but elderly scientist states that something is possible, he is almost certainly  
right. When he states that something is impossible, he is very probably wrong.
Perhaps the adjective "elderly" requires definition. In physics, mathematics, and astronautics it 
means over thirty; in the other disciplines, senile decay is sometimes postponed to the forties. 
There are, of course, glorious exceptions; but as every researcher just out of college knows, 
scientists of over fifty are good for nothing but board meetings, and should at all costs be kept out 
of the laboratory!*
* Arthur C. Clarke, Profiles of the Future (New York: Harper & Row 1964), p. 14.
Men Who Scored
There have been many men who have been successful in making remarkably accurate predictions of the 
future. Leonardo da Vinci possessed the necessary combination of imagination and nerve. Jules Verne, in 
the last century, gave us fantastic predictions, almost all of which have become present-day realities. 
Thorsten Veblen was able to foresee economic and social trends far in advance of their occurrence. H. G. 
Wells encompassed, at least in outline, the inevitability of a world society essentially based upon 

scientific, rather than political, orientation.
Anyone who doubts the possibility of long-range prediction might well consider the statements of Friar 
Roger Bacon, who lived between 1214 and 1294. These words were written at a time when science and 
technology as we know them were non-existent :
Instruments may be made by which the largest ships, with only one man guiding them, will be 
carried with greater velocity than if they were full of sailors. Chariots may be constructed that will  
move with incredible rapidity without the help of animals. Instruments of flying may be formed in 
which a man,sitting at his ease and meditating in any subject, may beat the air with his artificial 
wings after the manner of birds ... as also machines which will enable men to walk at the bottom of 
the seas. . . .
Perhaps the only thing we can be sure about when predicting the future is that it will sound utterly 
fantastic. It will be enormously different from anything that we regard as "natural" or "right." If our 
predictions in this book seem plausible to you, we have probably failed to see far enough ahead. If our 
projection of the future seems completely impossible and utterly fantastic, there is a possibility that we 
may be on the right track.
How We Predict the Future
As we pointed out in the first chapter, we have not been able to find a crystal ball we consider reliable for 
predicting the future. We have, instead, developed a method of analysis which we wish to set forth clearly. 
If you agree with the method by which we will attempt to predict some of the features of our twenty-first 
century civilization, perhaps you will then find some of the revolutionary conclusions more acceptable.
It is our hypothesis that there are three important factors that will greatly influence the evolution of our 
civilization. They are:
1. The values, purposes, and ideals toward which man is striving.
2. The method of thinking that we use to select our courses of action.
3. The state of technology, or, what sort of tools are available to help us do what we want to do.
In the next three chapters we are going to discuss each of these three factors that we believe will 
generate the future shape of our civilization. We believe that if we are able to determine what people 
really want here on earth, we will be able to anticipate the general directions in which men will go in 
building the civilization of the future. We will inquire into the "mind" and "heart" of man to see what he 
really seems to want most. We will see if there have been values that have been on a steady upswing for 
centuries. If we are successful in correctly pinpointing the values and ideals that human beings will most 

desire in the future, we will be on our way toward accurately predicting the type of civilization that lies 
ahead of us.
Values are only a first step. To know what man really wants is most helpful, but it is equally important that 
we accurately pick the method of thinking that he will use to try to get what he wants. For example, man 
has always placed a high value on good health. But simply having this value is not enough. The methods 
of thinking that accompany a value have a lot to do with whether it will be achieved. Thinking methodology 
that was in vogue during past centuries resulted in seriously ill people being bled by barbers. Blood-
sucking leeches were considered a necessary item in the doctor's bag. In contrast, the methods of 
thinking in use today in the field of medicine often call for a blood transfusion.
In the past if an idea sounded plausible, people believed it. If an authority said something was true, it was 
generally accepted. It was very rare for a person to say, "I don't care how reasonable it sounds or who 
says it's so, I want to make some careful tests to see for myself."
Thus, the methods of thinking that people employ play a big part in determining what kind of civilization 
they have.
A third factor that interacts with the value structure and the methods of thinking is the technology of a 
given age. For example, as a consequence of our value structure, we want to travel to the moon. We use 
scientific methods of thinking to arrive at the basic theories that show us how to get there. But if the state 
of technology does not yield a metal strong enough and light enough to build spacecraft, we're not likely 
to set foot on the moon.
Our technology has been slowly evolving for the last 600,000 years. It was a great day when prehistoric 
man first picked up a stick and used it as an instrument to achieve greater control over his environment. 
The invention of the wheel was a big step forward. But there has been more technological development in 
the last half-century than in the preceding 600,000 years. Computers, automation, and the development 
of atomic power enormously enhance man's potential to achieve whatever values and ideals he chooses.
Now you know how we are going about this. If anyone wishes to spell out in useful detail some of the 
forms of our future, we believe he must pick the right horse in three different races:
1. He must correctly assess what man will want to do—what he really values most.
2. He must accurately find out how he's going to try to do it— what methods of thinking he will rely upon 
most.
3. He must analyze the tools that man will have for accomplishing what he sets out to do—he must 
pinpoint the significant technological developments that will play major roles in the future.
All three factors interact with each other. The value structure not only influences the method of thinking 
and the technology, but it is, in turn, influenced by them. The method of thinking that man employs is 
affected by his value structure and the technology of the age, but it also plays a part in modifying both of 
these. Similarly, the technology of any given civilization interacts in a mutual way with the value structure 
and the method of thinking. These pregnant factors might be viewed as three gears that mesh with each 
other.

 
Now you have a way to judge how well we accomplish what we set out to do. If you don't feel that we 
have picked the trends that will play the largest part in shaping the future, then you probably won't accept 
the type of civilization that we describe in Part II of this book. If, however, you feel that we have correctly 
assessed the dominant trends in mankind's value system, if you feel that the method of thinking has been 
accurately pinpointed, and if you view technology in the same vein, then you may be intrigued by our 
projection of the experiences of a man and woman in the twenty-first century.
4.Our Values Chart Our Course
Many people have pessimistic feelings about the future. Perhaps the enormous growth of technology that 
enables man to build bombs that can destroy a city, automobiles that kill more people than wars, and 
planes that exceed the speed of sound give them a "What's next?" feeling. Perhaps some of the 
pessimism is due to the failure of economic, social, and political inventions to keep pace with the 
developments of physical science.
Many people identify the future with the value system projected by Aldous Huxley in Brave New World 
and George Orwell in 1984. These authors had an important message for us. They pointed out that if we 
choose values that ignore the inner needs of man, we can create a horror here on earth. Orwell wrote of a 
society in which technology was used to the ultimate to curtail freedom of thought and action. A television 
camera in every apartment enabled secret police to see what was going on. The only way for an 
individual to have any privacy was to turn his back to the camera and speak softly. This was modern 
technology implementing a value system of the past. Most science fiction uses an inadequate system of 
crude values that conflict with man's need to be a free spirit enjoying the potentialities of life.
We are rapidly approaching a stage in human development that will permit man to do almost anything he 
wants. We feel confident man will choose a set of values that will yield happiness. The warnings of Orwell 
and Huxley have not been in vain. We'd be glad to trade two hours in the present world of conflict for one 
hour in the advanced civilization of one hundred years from now. We feel that the next century will open 
the door to new horizons of human experience and happiness.

How We Got Our Value System
Perhaps the most significant thing a person can know about himself is to understand his own system of 
values. Almost every thing we do is a reflection of our own personal value system. What do we mean by 
values? Our values are what we want out of life. No one is born with a set of values. Except for our basic 
physiological needs, such as air, water, and food, most of our values are acquired after birth.
As an example of how values are picked up, individuals who grow up in the twentieth-century America are 
conditioned to the acquisition of money as a part of their value structure. It isn't "natural" for a person to 
Want money. It's a value most people in our culture acquire. When we were perhaps two years old, we 
learned that a penny would buy a piece of candy. We heard adults say with obvious approval, "He has a 
lot of money." As we grew up, we observed the correlation between money and larger cars, more 
beautiful homes, finer clothes, etc. Feelings of self-worth became associated with money. Over the years 
we gradually acquired a value structure that led us to place such a high value on money that in our 
present economy of scarcity we spend a large part of our lives scratching for dollars.
If we had grown up in a society where people do not stress material wealth, money would not have played 
an important part in our value structure. In Samoa food is there for the taking. Coconuts and fruit grow 
without cultivation, fish are available in the nearby sea, little or no clothing is needed, and it doesn't take 
long to put up a thatched-roof hut from materials that grow on all sides. In such a society people may be 
less likely to work hard for money. People conditioned in this manner do not act in ways men consider 
acquisitive, competitive, and thrifty.
When a culture is in a rapid state of transition, we have conflicting values which often yield hostility and 
unhappiness. Most people in twentieth-century America have a value system that includes both sincerity 
and the desire for money. Suppose a merchant advertising a sale were to include a "loss-leader" item 
such as a dacron shirt for $1.49. But if people flocked to purchase this advertised shirt, they would find 
that he had only six for sale at this price. The conflict in values might be felt by both the merchant and his 
customers. Our transitional culture of today keeps us in perpetual conflict.
Values are not immutable and eternal. They are created largely by the feelings of human beings. "The 
values both of individuals and of groups both large and small have been changed," Ralph Borsodi advises 
us:
They are being changed today more rapidly than ever before. The acquisition and the inculcation 
of values begins at birth in the acceptance or rejection of the child by its parents;the values 
inculcated and acquired during the first few years of life affect the unconscious mind so deeply that 
their alteration is not easy, but they can be changed and it is easier to change them in the modern . 
. . world than ever before.*
* Ralph Borsodi, "Eight Propositions About Values," The Humanist, (1964, Number Five), p. 152.  
Copyright 1964 by the American Humanist Association, Humanist House, Yellow Springs, Ohio. 

Reprinted by permission.
We can test a value by asking, "Does it yield happiness for us?" There is nothing absolute about any 
value—it's not a question of "right" or "wrong," "true" or "false," "good" or "bad." We should ask ourselves, 
"How do our values affect our happiness, both present and future?"
The happenstance of when and where we are born determines what set of values we acquire. A few 
years or a few miles can make a whale of a difference. Although we know that no one is born with a set of 
values, the particular set of values we acquire seems both "inborn" and "natural" to us. We always feel 
strange when we meet people with a different set of values. They don't act "right."
Jacques Fresco, one of the authors, visited Bora-Bora in the Society Islands thirty years ago. He carried 
with him fifty pocket mirrors and hundreds of beads and other novelties that he hoped to use in place of 
money. Fresco showed these gifts to several natives and then put them into a suitcase. When he returned 
to his living quarters several hours later, he was surprised to see a number of men and women freely 
handing out the beads, mirrors, and other trinkets to their Polynesian friends. He interrupted them and 
asked what was going on. One of the older men replied that Fresco had more than he needed and that it 
was a shame to see so many wonderful things not being put to use.
After establishing a favorable relationship with the Polynesians, he made a casual comment that he would 
appreciate their help in building an outrigger canoe. They gathered in a huddle and left without saying 
anything. Several days later, they appeared carrying an outrigger canoe and presented him with this 
extravagant gift. During the next two weeks he was unable to find time to enjoy their gift. They appeared 
disturbed and picked up the canoe and carried it away.
"Why are you taking my canoe away?" he asked.
An older Polynesian stepped forth and commented resentfully, "We give you boat. You no use. We take 
back."
It took Fresco a while to grasp fully the significance of such a system of values based on need and use, 
instead of ownership.
Many of the values that you and I have today were devised thousands of years ago in a world of great 
scarcity. For example, during past centuries it took about twenty farmers to produce enough surplus food 
to maintain one townsman. To have a deep feeling of worth in such a world, it was usual to have a value 
structure that generated hardworking and thrifty behavior.
The scarcity conditions of the past have led men to place a high value on owning as many things as 
possible. The ownership of a set of tools enabled a man to make his living. If someone had stolen these 
from him, his ability to earn a living would have been threatened. The ownership of material goods 
became associated with a feeling of self-esteem. In some of our past cultures, the concept of private 
ownership even extended to include women. Women could be bought and sold in the marketplace. Even 
in the twentieth century we have conflicts in our value system as the status of women is evolving from 
being the property of men to the role of free human beings.

"Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness"
If we are to make a reasonable anticipation of the type of world our descendants will have, we must 
adequately choose the dominant trends in values. So here we go! Although there are many ways to 
phrase it, we feel that the value wave of the future was expressed well by Thomas Jefferson in The 
Declaration of Independence in that historic phrase, "Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness."
Although we in mid-twentieth-century America have a degree of liberty and freedom, we have only 
reached the first rung in climbing the ladder toward achieving the highest degree of life and liberty. When 
men of the future look back and try to understand the relatively primitive conditions of mid-twentieth-
century America, they will be most perplexed. They may comment that while Fourth of July speeches in 
which the blessings of liberty, freedom, and the right of everyone to be an individual were spoken of quite 
highly, yet every year more and more laws were passed telling people that they couldn't do this, and they 
would pay a fine if they did that, and they would go to jail for doing something else. Perhaps further 
research by future historians might reveal that many of our laws were passed because we felt they were 
needed to keep men from hurting other men. In other words, the liberty of one person had to be limited so 
that he could not destroy the freedom and happiness of others. And this will be a curious thing for people 
in the future to understand about our present civilization. For they will find it unthinkable that conditions 
existed that permitted conflict between human beings.
The civilization of the future will outgrow the need for laws as we know them. For example, we have a law 
against murder.
In the future there will be no laws dealing with murder. No baby is born a murderer. Immersed in a 
conflict-culture such as ours, he interacts with the conditions of his environment to develop a pattern of 
reaction that can, under certain circumstances, lead him to kill another human being. As he grows up, he 
often sees headlines and pictures in newspapers telling of murder. In literature, movies, and television he 
witnesses thousands of murders.
Our sick society dotes over such legendary murderers as Jesse James, Al Capone and Bonnie and 
Clyde. A young child lives under conditions where he is trained to be jealous and acquisitive. His king-
sized ego learns to respond with feelings of deep hurt and rejection. If one day the grown man were to 
find his wife in bed with another man, he would respond in a way that is dictated by the years of 
conditioning. It would seem natural for him to seize a gun and murder the man.
Today we are beginning to identify various things which condition us to act as we do. In the future the 
factors that condition human beings to kill or do other things that harm fellow human beings will be 
understood and eliminated. The value structure will not permit children to be conditioned in sick, twisted, 
and insane ways. If it is found that someone might do something that could hurt another human being, the 
reaction will not be to pass a law against it. People will not use an archaic structure of courts, judges, and 
laws. They will simply ask themselves, "What is it that permits a person to act in a way that could hurt 
someone else?" When they find the root of the difficulty, they will modify conditions so that people will not

—or can not—act in this way.
What About Human Nature?
When little was known about cultural anthropology, sociology, and psychology, it seemed quite valid to 
resist proposed reforms by saying, "It won't work. It's against human nature." It is difficult for many people 
to appreciate the fact that what they call "human nature" just doesn't exist. Scientific research has 
discovered that it is probably not even "human nature" for a man to be attracted sexually to a woman! The 
particular object to which one is attracted sexually seems to be determined by experiences that happen 
early in life. This even applies to some animals. Eckhard Hess kept a young male jungle fowl with him for 
the first month of its life. It was not permitted to be with any of its own species during this time. Hess 
noticed :
This animal, even after five years—much of that time in association with his own species—courts  
human beings with typical behavior, but not females of his own species. This certainly is a far-
reaching effect and is similar to the finding of Räber (1948), who reported on a male turkey whose 
behavior toward human beings was similar.*
* Eckhard H. Hess, "Imprinting," Science, (1959), p. 140.
Man is like a mirror—he largely reflects his surroundings. If man were to come into the world with a fixed 
"nature" consisting of automatic responses, civilization would be impossible. Like the ants, we would live 
out our lives in patterns that are modified but little with the passing of time. The wonderful thing about us 
is that we come into this world with maximum flexibility.
Values of the Future
We believe that man's pursuit of happiness under the conditions of the twenty-first century will permit him 
to achieve the fullest expression of the following values:
Life and Liberty 
A matured society will permit man a maximum degree of life, liberty, and freedom. Individuals will 
understand themselves. They will choose patterns of living that will deeply express their own inner selves. 
Never before has society been able to permit all individuals to express their intellectual, emotional, and 
physical needs. At long last, individuals will no longer be subordinated and pressured to conform to a set 
pattern.

Economic Abundance. 
There will be economic abundance so that the material needs of men are amply met. Competitiveness, 
acquisitiveness, thriftiness, and the hardworking syndrome will be as extinct as the dinosaur.
Health and Longevity. 
The ideal of radiant health will continue to be valued as it has in the past. But for the first time it can be 
realized. Scientific nutrition along the lines suggested by one of the authors in How to Live Longer—
Stronger—Slimmer will be built into everyday life-patterns.* Improved genetic designs and living 
conditions which promote maximal health will give a freedom from disease and a maximum of energy that 
was seldom achieved in older civilizations. The average life-span may well exceed 150 years in the 
twenty-first century. Eventually, it will stretch toward immortality.
* Kenneth S. Keyes, Jr., How to Live Longer—Stronger—Slimmer (New York: Frederick Fell, 1966).
Love and Friendship. 
Man's feelings of friendship, warmth, and love for all other men will deepen to an extent that can not be 
understood by those who live in the twentieth-century world of scarcity. Friendship and love in the 
twentieth century are so clouded with conscious and unconscious hostilities, competitiveness, envy, 
greed, and insecurity that the deepest levels of human warmth can not be approached. Only in a mature 
society is it possible for man to savor fully his relationships with fellow human beings.
Physical Pleasures.
The potential that men and women have for enjoying the pleasures of sex will reach their greatest fruition 
in a mature society. Sexual behavior in mid-twentieth-century America will be regarded as incredibly 
primitive, for it is overladen with guilt feelings inculcated by early raining. In the twenty-first century sexual 
emotions will be treasured because of their historical association with the creation of life. Deep feelings of 
pleasure, oneness, and relaxation will flow from the mature expressions of human sexual feelings.
Appreciation of Beauty.
Man's appreciation of beauty will expand from the narrow ranges of the present into the greatly enlarged 
horizons he will achieve in the future. The physical beauty of human beings will not be confined to the 
narrow standards of the "beauty queen" mentality of today. The beauty of human beings of all ages from 
birth to the lovely mellowness of old age will be appreciated. Esthetic experience will become a pervasive 
reality in the lives of all men. Almost everything in the twenty-first-century world will be beautiful. Man's 
esthetic sense will not be dulled by exposure to sham and artificiality, slums, jukeboxes, and advertising 
art. As we will discuss in a later chapter, music will acquire new dimensions that completely transcend the 
limited orchestral ranges of today. Beauty will become an integral part of life, not just something we 
appreciate at detached moments. People will be more interested in producing art than in acquiring and 
displaying it.
Deep Levels of Self-Knowledge and Communication of Feelings.
People in the twenty-first-century world will achieve penetrating levels of rapport, both with themselves 
and with the feelings of others. Many of the inner feelings of people in the twentieth century are repressed 
and do not come fully into awareness. It is extremely rare that one's innermost feelings can be continually, 
fully, and freely expressed, even between friends or lovers. In the future all feelings will be eagerly sought, 
verbalized, and thoroughly accepted by others. This will produce a new dimension of relaxed living that is 

almost unknown today.
Vicarious Sharing of the Delights of Others
The relaxed egos of individuals in the twenty-first century will permit them to achieve a deep pleasure in 
sharing the happiness and the experiences of others. The achievement of happiness will not be on a 
narrow self-centered basis in which one ego fights another for a feeling of worth. People in the future will 
feel that the happiness levels of all individuals are to a large degree interlocked and rise and fall together. 
For example, if one person is sick, the disease might spread to others. If he is unhappy, the interaction 
with others might make them unhappy. If an individual is given an inferior status, his resentment might 
lead to hostile acts that hurt others. Hence, individuals in the twenty-first century will value the feelings of 
other people as their own and derive a deep satisfaction from knowing that all men in their society live 
relaxed, deeply-fulfilled and fascinating lives. No one will stand alone.
The Challenge of Life.
The challenge of life that men and women will experience in the future will, perhaps, be a supreme value. 
For the first time all men and women will live a multidimensional life, limited only by their imagination. In 
the twentieth century we could classify people by saying, "He is good in
sports. She is an intellectual. He is an artist." In the future all people will have the time and the facilities to 
accept the fantastic variety of challenges that life offers them. Men and women will feel perfectly at home 
in all parts of their world. The satisfaction of a continuing self-development will be a normal part of life, not 
a rare thing as it is in the mid-twentieth century.
Open Eyes and Open Minds
As we sketch a picture of the twenty-first-century world, we will seek values that will help individual men, 
women, and children to achieve feelings of fulfillment. Most of the functional value systems of the past will 
seem inappropriate in the world of the future that we project in Part II.
We must be prepared to see the dissolution of human institutions that have been with us for thousands of 
years if they no longer contribute maximally to human happiness in the changed world of the twenty-first 
century. As we study the future value structures of mankind, we must not be like travelers who go to a 
foreign land and immediately compare everything with their own home town. To understand another 
place, we must lay aside the value patterns that we are used to. We must relax our mental sets so that we 
may feel a new pattern of human experience. The biggest problem that we face is to get the twentieth-
century dust out of our eyes so that we may feel and think as freshly as possible about the almost 
limitless permutations and combinations of life patterns that mankind may explore for ever higher levels of 
fulfillment in the future.
If you think that today's vices and virtues are absolute and ultimate and reflect the final value system for 
all times and all civilizations, you will find our projection of the future to be shocking and incredible. If you 
have an absolute attitude toward values, all you can do is to project your particular conditioning onto 
mankind's dynamically evolving future. You will tend to see the future in terms of the present with, of 

course, some of the burrs removed. If you want even the slightest chance of understanding where we are 
going—and possibly helping us get there—shake out the absolutes and put in the relatives. A culture 
must be seen relative to time, relative to place, and relative to a particular framework of values, thinking 
methodology, and technology.
Civilization has just recently given up crawling and has begun to toddle. With the development of scientific 
methods of thinking several centuries ago, mankind began to blossom into what might be called the 
childhood of civilization. We are today fast-growing adolescents. We have clashing values. We are torn 
between our inside feelings and needs and outside structures and pressures. The adulthood of human 
civilization lies before us. There is only one thing we can know for certain—the world of the future will be 
enormously different from anything in the past or present.
5.The Scientific Method
Our method of thinking helps us choose between formulations, ideas, thoughts, notions, hypotheses, 
theories, and other cerebral itches. It enables us to decide what is "true" and what is "false." Our method 
of thinking should help us pick the most reliable thing to do that offers maximum predictability. It should 
enable us to reject ideas that do not correspond with observable facts.
What are the various methods of thinking that man has used? There is the method of appealing to 
authority, or, asking what the wise men, present or past, have to say about the problem. There is the 
method of intuition, which means pumping your feelings for something that may bear on the problem. 
There is the method of rational, philosophical, logical thinking, which means using your brain to test out 
various verbal structures.
We're in favor of using all the above methods of thinking, and any others you can find, for the purpose of 
coming up with creative ideas that may be useful. It is vital that we should not misuse these methods of 
thinking by relying on them to make a final selection. To choose the most useful ideas we must finally quit 
talking and check whether a verbal formulation corresponds with observable facts.
The history of human thought shows that we don't get very far as long as we spin words around in our 
heads and fail to take the scientific step of checking them against observable facts. Non-scientific 
methods of thinking do not produce agreement between individuals of different backgrounds. They can 
argue "until the cows come home," and problems still don't get settled. Even worse, non-scientific 
methods have never been successful in building an effective structure of knowledge on which men of all 
nations can rely. Reliable knowledge accumulates only when men slow the flow of words and start 
scientifically checking their ideas against something outside their skulls. The enormous progress of 
science and the technological marvels of our age were possible because men tested their ideas against 
observable facts.

The Beginning of the Scientific Method
Although the Greeks dabbled in and seemed to have anticipated almost everything, it was not until 
Francis Bacon (1561-1626) appeared on the scene that men began to use systemically the method of 
science. As Dr. George Gallup pointed out :
Bacon argued strenuously for an entirely new approach to the physical world. ... He advocated the 
experimental approach, its virtue being that every finding and conclusion could be tested. Since 
every new bit of knowledge was demonstrably true, there would be no room for quarreling schools 
of thought, and knowledge about the physical world could be rapidly expanded. Bacon's foresight 
has proved correct.
The world of knowledge, as a result, has been literally transformed by this special way of 
channeling man's intelligence.
Almost all of the physical and material benefits mankind enjoys today are a product of this method  
of science.*
* George Gallup, The Miracle Ahead (New York, Evanston, and London: Harper & Row, 
Publishers, 1964), p. 153.
In a way this scientific method of thinking is really nothing new and not so unusual. We use it often in our 
everyday personal, business, and social problems. The thing that makes the big difference is the thorough 
insistence that all knowledge pass the test of being checked by observation. Most of our everyday 
thinking is a mixture of all methods of thinking.
The scientific method is almost as "old as the hills." Imagine a group of cave men perched on a river 
bank, arguing whether Onk or Donk can run faster. They'll probably use all of the methods of thinking that 
we have described above. They may get the opinion of the wise men of the tribe (reference to authority). 
They'll probably argue and argue (the use of logic). Onk has bigger muscles, but Donk has longer legs, 
etc. The words will whirl around endlessly. Perhaps one of the women will use her intuition and try to pick 
the man that can run faster. Or they may use a method to settle the argument that, unfortunately, is still 
with us—they may fight about it. The one who beats up the other one is assumed to be right. This is the 
way of the jungle, and it is universally relied upon by lions, tigers, wolves, etc. Unfortunately, in our mid 
twentieth-century world almost all really big disputes between nations are settled in this age-old fashion.
None of the above methods of settling the dispute may be called scientific. The words go 'round and 
'round, the tempers go up and up, but all this has very little to do with who can run faster. Finally, some 
little genius perched on a branch interrupts the sweating people below, "Why don't we let them run
to the big oak tree over there and see who is faster?" This genius has proposed a method of settling the 
dispute that would probably enable most reasonable men to reach agreement. It is the method of science. 
It is a method that does not involve the use of words to decide the problem.

The two men get ready to run. The signal is given. They start running. Everybody stops arguing and starts 
observing. They are anxious to know the facts. They use their senses to report information that will help 
them decide. They will carefully note whether Onk arrives first, Donk arrives first, or whether they both get 
there at the same time. The argument as to which could run faster is settled at that time by using the 
scientific method.
If these cave men had generalized the lesson and had decided to use observation to test all their 
arguments, problems, ideas, and theories, the human race could have developed today's civilization 
about fifty thousand years ago! They could have fought out all of the atomic wars and gone through the 
uncomfortable transition periods a long time before we came on the scene to sweat it out. But instead we 
find that man became too intrigued with verbal intricacies and developed the habit of using verbal means 
to decide between "true" and "false."
The Greek philosopher Aristotle had one of the most brilliant minds the world has ever produced. 
According to some ancient authors, he wrote 1,000 volumes that covered practically every field of 
learning. When Aristotle was writing on physics, he explained that a heavy object would fall faster than a 
light object of the same shape and material. This verbal conclusion seemed so natural and obvious to 
him! How silly to bother with testing. He just reasoned it out in a way that seemed logical. Weight makes 
things fall. Therefore, the more weight, the faster the fall. Seems reasonable, doesn't it? Aristotle had 
many assistants, and it would have been very easy for him to check this by actually dropping a light rock 
and a heavy rock from the top of the Parthenon. But he did not depend on the scientific method for 
checking his thinking. He liked to prove things rationally, logically, intellectually. He didn't know it was 
necessary to test the results of his brilliant mind by observation.
You and I lost two thousand years of progress because of this non-scientific attitude of Aristotle's age. In 
the sixteenth century Galileo began to wonder about the predictability of Aristotle's theory of falling 
objects. But he didn't refute Aristotle with intellectual argument. He used the scientific method for 
checking it out. He let the facts speak for themselves. Instead of "settling" the problem by words, he 
dropped a heavy weight and a light weight at the same time. They both hit the ground simultaneously. 
"Nature" had spoken. Sane people stopped arguing about the problem. Regardless of how illogical it 
might seem to us, the facts are that the weight of an object, under standard conditions, does not 
determine the rate at which it falls.
When we test our ideas by our senses, we can go forward. We can build useful structures of reliable 
knowledge. We can predict. The unscientific tendency to believe without testing is not, alas, confined to 
the Ancient Greeks. "Men are apt to be much more influenced by words," said the famous scientist 
Pavlov, "then by the actual facts of the surrounding reality."
Scientific Methodology
Scientific thinking may be boiled down to three steps:

Coming Up with New Ideas. 
We use our imagination, intuition, memory, etc. to suggest ways of explaining or solving a problem.
Processing Ideas Mentally. 
We analyze our thoughts to determine a way to test them by observation. By logic we can determine how 
well our brain child fits in with known facts. We can try to figure out intellectually how well it will work. 
What will be its consequences?
Testing by Observation. 
After we have found a possible new solution to our problem, explored it, and figured out a way to check it, 
we are then ready to take the third step which will make our thinking scientific. This is testing by 
observation. This is where we shut up and let observable facts do the talking.
The Scientific Method in Action
Suppose you were to get into an argument with someone about whether a chameleon will change its color 
to match its surroundings. Perhaps you have heard the tale of a chameleon that went crazy trying to 
match a Scotch plaid. Now, if you would want to pursue this matter in an argumentative or philosophical 
fashion, you could just stand around whirling the words all day and night. But if you felt like getting useful 
information on the matter, then it would be time to stop talking and start doing. You would bide your time 
until you could round up one or more chameleons. Then you would let them demonstrate their alleged 
powers of matching their background. People who have the scientific habit of letting the facts speak for 
themselves have observed that a chameleon can no more pick its color than a zebra can pick its stripes. 
When these people check things out, they find that a chameleon turns green when it is excited, 
frightened, angered, asleep, or dead. It turns brown in response to low temperatures, hunger, and strong 
sunlight. If you take a green chameleon and throw it into the icebox, it will take about three minutes for it 
to change from green to brown.
If an argumentative person were to use his logical ability and debate the subject of how chameleons 
should act, it would be hard to convince him that chameleons don't give a hoot about matching their 
backgrounds. If you could persuade him to check his thoughts by observation, he would find that a green 
lizard is perfectly comfortable on a brown background and a brown lizard is perfectly at home on a green 
background. He'll even let you photograph him that way.
Anyone who tests his thoughts by using his eyes, ears, touch, smell, or taste is using the method of 
science. "The scientific method," says Stuart Chase:
is concerned with how things do happen, not how they ought to happen. Knowledge of the way 
things do happen, with no ifs, ands, or buts, allows us to deal more effectively with our 
environment. The method is no more an exclusive matter for professionals than it is a matter of  
white coats and goggles. Most of us are amateur scientists today, though we are seldom aware of  
it. . . . The scientific method is not primarily a matter of laboratories and atom-smashers or even  

meter sticks; it is a way of looking at things, a way of gathering from the world outside knowledge  
which will stay put, and not go wandering off like the wickets in Alice's croquet game.*
* Stuart Chase, Tyranny of Words (New York: Harcourt Brace and Company, 1938), pp. 123-24.  
Reprinted by permission of Harcourt, Brace & World, Inc.
Many people have confused the scientific method with laboratories and test tubes. But a laboratory is only 
a room where there are special devices for turning up facts. Charles Darwin, who is regarded as one of 
the world's greatest scientists, did not use a laboratory. The world was his laboratory. He needed no 
special apparatus to uncover the facts that suggested and confirmed his theory of evolution. The scientific 
method is an attitude—a dogged insistence that no matter how right something sounds, we're going to 
check it out by observation. Sometimes this means tests, and sometimes it only means opening our eyes 
to observe facts that have been around us for years. So, if you want to boil down the method of science to 
one word, it's simply testing.
As man reaches out toward the twenty-first century, he will learn to be suspicious of all ideas that are not 
formulated so that they can be tested by observation. He will realize that the history of human thought 
shows that the ideas of which we are surest are the ones we most need to test. He will realize that his 
common sense only mirrors his training and experience. What seems natural and right to him is usually a 
reflection of the conditions under which he spent his first decade of life.
New generations, who will live and breathe the scientific spirit, will supplant us. Prejudice, grasshopper-
like guessing, and emotional thinking will be rare. People of the future will, as suggested by John Dewey, 
achieve, ". . . the habit of suspended judgment, of skepticism, of desire for evidence, of appeal to
observation rather than sentiment, discussion rather than bias, inquiry rather than conventional 
idealizations." They will know when further logical manipulation is fruitless. They will know when to stop 
discussing and check the facts. They will be like the proverbial "Man from Missouri"—show me. If they 
want to know whether a pudding's good, they won't just read the recipe;
they know that "the proof of the pudding is in the eating." They will feel, as Karl Pearson does, that, 
"There is no short cut to truth, no way to gain a knowledge of the universe except through the gateway of 
scientific method."
Attitudes that Help Us Develop Reliable Knowledge
In his book How to Develop Your Thinking Ability one of the authors has described in detail how the 
scientific method of thought can be used in meeting everyday life problems.*
* Kenneth S. Keyes, Jr., How to Develop Your Thinking Ability (New York: McGraw Hill Publishing Co., 
1950).

Men, women, and children in the twenty-first-century world will probably use these or similar techniques to 
make the scientific spirit a way of life, not just something they use every now and then. They will hold 
ideas tentatively, not as bastions to be defended, but as tools to be improved. They will keep their eyes 
and minds open to find facts that do not support their points of view, for contrary facts may lead them to 
formulations that have greater predictability.
Because of limitations in our sensory and cortical equipment, no one can know all about anything in this 
world. All of our senses are limited in range. Dogs can hear higher-pitched sounds than we can. Our eyes 
can see only a small part of the electromagnetic spectrum. Edison said, "We don't know one-millionth of 
one per cent about anything." Since we can't know all there is to know about anything we must always 
keep an open mind for important factors that have been left out of our thinking. Wendell Johnson pointed 
out, "An attitude of this kind—'You can't tell me anything about that'—has an effect quite similar to that of 
a pus sac in the brain."
The world in which we live is constantly changing. No object in this world is without change. "The world 
rolls," said Ralph Waldo Emerson, "the circumstances vary every hour." On the atomic level all we have is 
motion and dynamism—perpetual split-second change. If we would act in ways that are effective and 
bring us the most happiness, we must train our senses to scan the world around us constantly to detect 
things that may have changed in a significant way. Alfred North Whitehead said, "Knowledge keeps no 
better than fish."
Another thing that helps us achieve the scientific spirit is to remember that no two things in this world are 
absolutely identical. Two things may be similar for our purpose, but the closer we look, the more 
differences we find. We become prejudiced when we lump a group of people under a single label and 
then respond to individuals as though they have the same characteristics as the label. Only open eyes 
and open minds are prepared to cope with a world in which no two things are alike. The words we use 
imply similarity. We must use our eyes and ears to remind us of differences that are important for our 
purpose.
Men, women, and children in the twenty-first century will learn to think in terms of degrees. The language 
we use often implies polar opposites—good or bad, true or false, beautiful or ugly, fast or slow, black or 
white. But the world in which we live usually shows a large number of degrees between extremes.
If we are to be as relaxed and happy as possible, our thoughts must adequately reflect the reality around 
us. And we can't do that by making black and white statements if the area to which we are referring 
contains shades of grey.
Individuals in the twenty-first century will learn to think in terms of probability. They will realize that man 
must regard all his knowledge as more or less probable. "Absolute certainty," said C. J. Keyser, "is a 
privilege of uneducated minds—and fanatics. It is, for scientific folks, an unattainable ideal." The
people of the future will think of their ideas in terms of an ascending scale of probability, ranging from, 
"This seems most unlikely," through, "This may be or may not be confirmed by further observation," to, 
"This has a very high degree of probability."
When people adapt their thinking to the degree nature of our world, they will be more relaxed. They will be 

more effective at locating and adopting, but always tentatively, the points-of-view that best represent the 
world about them. "A truly scientific attitude," said Dr. Roger Williams, "is one of humility. . .
A know-it-all attitude is incompatible with the scientific method." individuals in the twenty-first century will 
be acutely aware of the way their own nervous system influences their observations and reactions. We 
see life through the filter of our own individual personality and mode of thinking. Even the language 
structure that we absorb plays an important part in how we think and the way we observe things. Our ego-
needs play a big part in selecting what we notice, fail to notice, remember, or forget. "We see things not' 
as they are," said the wise man, "but as we are."
Individuals in the twenty-first-century world will have a pro found feeling of the way all people and all 
things interact with their environment. People or things are not cut-and-dried entities. The way they act 
varies depending on the time and place. We must notice differences. Wendell Johnson said, "To a 
mouse, cheese is cheese. That is why mouse traps are effective."
Ever Lovelier Worlds
The success of the method of science in solving almost every problem put to it will give individuals in the 
twenty-first century a deep confidence in its effectiveness. They will not be afraid to experiment with new 
ways of feeling, thinking, and acting, for they will have observed the self-corrective aspect of science. 
Science gives us the latest word, not the last word. They will know that if they try something new in 
personal or social life, the happiness it yields can be determined after sufficient experience has 
accumulated. They will adapt to changes in a relaxed way as they zigzag toward the achievement of their 
values. They will know that there are better ways of doing things than have been used in the past, and 
they will be determined to experiment until they have found them. They will know that most of the 
unhappiness of human beings in the mid-twentieth century was not due to the lack of shiny new gadgets; 
it was due, in part, to not using the scientific method to check out new political and social structures that 
could have yielded greater happiness for them.
About a century ago Abraham Lincoln brilliantly expressed the attitudes that will most effectively help us 
work toward a happier future: "The dogmas of the quiet past are inadequate to the stormy present. The 
occasion is piled high with difficulty, and we must rise with the occasion. As our case is new, so we must 
think anew and act anew."
Future generations of mankind will realize that it is only through the scientific method of thinking that their 
value systems can be fully realized. They will welcome experimentation of all kinds in all phases of life. 
They will have a habitual open-mindedness coupled with a rigid insistence that all problems be
formulated in a way that permits factual checking. They will have the attitude described by Wendell 
Johnson, "To a scientist a theory is something to be tested. He seeks not to defend his beliefs, but to 
improve them. He is, above everything else, an expert at 'changing his mind.' "*
* Wendell Johnson, People in Quandaries (New York: Harper & Brother 1946), p. 39. '

The paramount role that the method of science will play in helping us achieve "Life, Liberty, and the 
Pursuit of Happiness" was eloquently expressed by Herman J. Müller:
Above all, the spirit of science is the spirit of progress. . . .
It can afford men ever newer horizons and higher peaks to climb, materially, mentally, and 
spiritually. It can afford ever greater and more inspiring opportunities for cooperative as well as 
individual achievement. Its pathway leads not only outwards into space and to other worlds than 
ours, but also inwards into the recesses of life, of the mind, and of the heart. By its means we will 
ourselves assume the role of creators of ever lovelier worlds and more sublime beings.**
** Herman J. Müller, ". . . Therefore Choose Life" (Santa Barbara, California: Center for the Study 
of Democratic Institutions, 1965), p. 37.
6.Cybernated Technology
How would you like to have a guaranteed life income of $100,000 per year—with no taxes? And how 
would you like to earn this income by working a three-hour day, one day per week, for a five-year period 
of your life, providing you have a six-months vacation each year? Sound fantastic? Not at all with modern 
technology. This is not twenty-first-century pie-in-the-sky. It could probably be achieved in ten years in the 
United States if we applied everything we now know about automation and computers to produce a 
cybernated society. It probably won't be done this rapidly, for it would take some modern thinking applied 
in an intelligent crash program. Such a crash program was launched to develop the atomic bomb in a little 
over four years.
It might otherwise have taken thirty years. We get moving if we're threatened, but we chew the fat a long 
time when it comes to constructive improvements in human affairs.
You will recall that there are three factors that will play a vital role in the evolution of our civilization. One is 
our value system. Another factor is our method of thinking. The third is the state of our technology—the 
methods and machines for producing goods and services. The technological wave of the future will 
involve automated machines guided by computers.
When Queen Julianna of the Netherlands saw a demonstration of an electronic computer at an 
Amsterdam exhibition, she said, "I can't understand it. I can't even understand the people who can 
understand it." But the situation isn't really as bad as the queen implies. It isn't necessary to understand 
how a computer works any more than it is necessary to understand how the internal combustion engine in 
your car works for you to enjoy the benefits of the automotive age. The important thing is that we 
understand the effects of automation and computers. And that's what this chapter is about.
"The electronic computer," says Dr. Louis T. Rader, a vice-president of General Electric, "may have a 

more beneficial potential for the human race than any other invention in history, Sir Leon Bagrit, who is 
the head of Britain's Elliot-Automation, has said that the computer and automation will bring, "the great
est change in the whole history of mankind." Let's find out what they're talking about.
Automation simply means replacing human hands and feet by machines that do the same job—only 
better. Computers today replace human brains with electronic equipment that manipulates figures, makes 
programmed decisions, and gives instructions far more efficiently than any human. Cybernation means 
the control of the entire factory by a computer that acts in place of the boss.
Development of Automation
The purpose of machines is to lighten the burden of work. Suppose there were no machines. In such a 
society a person might have to work from 100 to 200 days per year just to get enough food for himself. To 
produce even a shirt to cover his back could require over 100 hours of labor! Suppose you would have to 
produce a shirt under primitive conditions. How many hours would you spend preparing soil and growing 
the cotton? After the cotton bloomed you'd have to pick it, tease out the seed, and spin the fiber into 
thread. Once you have enough thread, you could weave it into cloth. Then you would need to cut the cloth 
into the form of a shirt and sew it together. Imagine the amount of time it would take if your only tools were 
a hoe, a knife, and a needle.
The time needed to produce a shirt took a nose dive back in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
when much of the work became mechanized and concentrated in factories. The development of the 
cotton gin, which separated the seed from the white cotton fiber, the invention of machinery that made 
thread, and the design of looms that wove the thread into cloth enabled a better shirt to be manufactured 
with only several hours of human labor. Today a shirt may represent only a little over one hour of human 
time from seed to salesman!
In the twentieth century mass production with assembly lines and improved machinery greatly reduced 
the cost of producing goods. Automation is based on all of the principles of mechanization and mass 
production, but it goes one step further. Previously factories needed humans to operate each machine. 
Automated machines operate themselves. Through "feedback" mechanisms they observe what they are 
doing. They give themselves instructions, and they check on the quality of their output. They work faster 
and at speeds that would kill a human. They don't get tired and they don't forget. They never go out on 
strike or ask for pay increases. Factory design is simplified. Automatic machines don't need parking lots, 
air conditioning, bright lighting, wash rooms, lunchrooms, or coffee breaks. They don't even need 
buildings for many types of work.
Automatic machines have been, or soon will be, designed to perform almost any conceivable task done 
by human beings. Since we have only two hands, it is possible to design automatic machines that will far 
exceed the manipulative ability of a human. In 1961 U.S. Industries announced that they had developed 
the first general-purpose automation machine at a price of around $2,500. It is called the TransfeRobot. 
Its swinging arm and hand is infinitely superior to any human arm or hand. It never gets tired, and the 

electronic brain guiding it seldom goofs off. It picks things up and puts them down with an accuracy of two 
thousandths of an inch! The Westclox Corporation of LaSalle, Illinois, uses the TransfeRobot to oil clock 
assemblies as they speed by on a conveyor belt. It oils eight precision bearings in a second. At the 
Underwood Corporation typewriter plant in Hartford, the robot picks up and inserts a small typewriter 
component into a close-fitting nest. The hand of the TransfeRobot can be adjusted to something more 
tender than a lover's caress, or it can grab things with the force of a vice. It can use mechanical fingers or 
electromagnets. For oozy stuff such as chocolate creams, it uses a gentle vacuum.
John Snyder, the maker of the TransfeRobot, says:
So far we have not been able to find any material or any shape or any size it can't handle. . . . We  
built an automated stamping line for Nissan Motors in Japan. It has six presses with TransfeRobot-
type machines to take the stuff out of one press and feed it to the next. One man watches raw  
sheet metal go in and one more watches finished fenders come out. It replaces, oh, maybe 20 men  
altogether. But that's not all. You could extend the process right up to bolting the fender to a car.  
Even considering how cheap labor is in Japan, the thing saves money.
History of Computers
Just as automated machinery replaces the tired muscles of man, computers are being developed that can 
replace the bored minds of men who are engaged in the repetitive production of goods and services in our 
industrial society. And just as automated machinery does a better job on repetitive tasks than the human 
hand, a computer outperforms a human mind. The circuits in an electronic computer can respond in less 
than a millionth of a second. This is over a thousand times faster than it takes the neurons in our brains to 
respond to incoming stimuli. Robert Theobald has pointed out, ". . . in the near future we will see that the 
computer can take over any structured task . . ."
Man worked toward the development of a computer for a long time. The simple abacus of ancient times 
was a first step. In 1671 Gottfried Leibnitz tried unsuccessfully to invent a mechanical calculating 
machine. "It is unworthy of excellent men," he wrote, "to lose hours like slaves in the labor of calculation." 
An Englishman named Charles Babbage worked out many of the principles of modern mechanical 
calculating machines in 1834, but he was unable to produce a successful model because the technology 
of his time could not turn out accurate gears. It was not until 1944 that the first true computer was 
produced by Howard Aiken, a professor at Harvard University. It is a sad reflection of our times that this 
pioneering computer was used to compute weapon trajectories for the U.S. Navy.
Aiken's first computer was soon overshadowed by the famous ENIAC, developed at the University of 
Pennsylvania. Though a great improvement, EN I AC had 18,000 vacuum tubes, was unreliable, and took 
too much space. Computers began to trim their waistlines and speed up their operations about 1958 
when small reliable transistors and other solid-state components replaced the vacuum tubes. Computers 
today can multiply a half-million ten-digit numbers in a second. Many computers can make more 
calculations in an hour than an auditorium full of mathematicians could accomplish in their lifetime. In 
1951 there were under 100 computers in operation in the United States. By 1965 the number had jumped 

to 22,500 and is constantly accelerating. Some companies use up to 200 of them.
As long ago as 1959 the Sperry-Rand Corporation produced a computer that was able to handle 250,000 
additions and subtractions of twelve-digit numbers per second. This enables it to make up a monthly 
payroll for 15,000 employees in only fifteen hours. Previously, it took 450 to 900 hours to do this job. 
Since only a part of the circuits of the computer are used while calculating a payroll, it can simultaneously 
solve scientific problems on the side!
By 1965 computers had been used in more than 700 specific tasks. At the time you read this page this 
number will have increased enormously. Major airlines use computers to give instant information on seats 
available on all flights. Stock Exchanges use computers to give instant stock quotations. Computers are 
now busy setting newspaper type, pawing over our income tax returns, controlling the flow of electricity of 
most power companies, helping you make long distance phone calls by ferreting out available circuits, 
navigating planes and ships, and providing railroads with instant information on where their freight cars 
are hiding out. Computers can land a plane in foggy weather without any human help. Our space ships 
that orbit the earth, spy on the moon, and whiz by the planets are highly dependent on computers from 
the design board to the final inch of their spectacular flights. Much of today's business, government, and 
science would be paralyzed if the computers were ever to demand a vacation.
It has been estimated that if there were no computers, the phone company would now have to hire all the 
working women in the country just to handle the flood of calls. Computers today control the production 
machinery in the petrochemical, petroleum, paper, and steel industries. At Western Electric's "Plant of 
Tomorrow" computers handle the billing, shipping, and warehousing; they order materials, write checks, 
and decide what to manufacture and how many. Time magazine has pointed out:
Computers have helped scientists to discover more than 100 new subatomic particles, and are 
busy analyzing strange radio signals from outer space. Biochemists have used the computer to 
delve into the hitherto unassailable secrets of the human cell, and hospitals have begun to use it to 
monitor the condition of patients. Computers now read electrocardiograms faster and more 
accurately than a jury of physicians. The Los Angeles police department plans to use computers to 
keep a collection of useful details about crimes and an electronic rogue's gallery of known 
criminals. And in a growing number of schools, computers have taken jobs as instructors in 
languages, history and mathematics.*
*"Technology," Time, April 2, 1965, p. 86. Courtesy TIME; Copyright Time Inc., 1965.
Although recently invented, computers are rapidly transforming our civilization. "In a Chicago radio plant," 
according to Walter Buckingham:
1000 radios a day now are assembled by two men where two hundred had been required before 
automation. The duPont Company, using a computer at M.I.T., solved in thirty hours a chemical 
problem that would have required one man, working forty hours a week for twenty years to do the 
arithmetic alone.At the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton an electronic computer works out 
weather predictions in three hours that would take one man with an adding machine three  

centuries.In these last two cases, the job would not have been practical or economical to tackle 
without automation.*
* Walter Buckingham, Automation (New York: Harper & Row, 1963), pp.27-8
A bakery is being automated so that grain delivered to the silo is not touched by human hands until the 
loaves of bread are ready for delivery. One bakery run by one man could supply the needs of an entire 
state. A local union with 1,300 members in 1959 had only 350 in 1963. Soon their plant will be automated 
further, and there will be only twenty-five workers, producing twice as much as before. Union leaders 
today are desperately worried about the livelihood of their members. Nevertheless, one union is 
automating its headquarters and reducing the staff from sixty to only six girls. When quizzed about this 
apparent contradiction, the union official explained that, "Business is business."
Cybernation
Cybernation has been described as the wedding of automated machines with computers. When you equip 
a factory with automated machinery that is controlled by a computer, you have taken the work out of 
production. There is little for people to do but turn the machinery on, step aside, and let it do the work.
For example, an automated cleaning fluid plant will have machines that mix and bottle the stuff. When 
cybernated, this plant will use a computer that is electrically connected to every machine, every storage 
bin, and every operating mechanism in the entire plant. The computer will have at all times full data on 
what is happening throughout the plant. It will digest this information and give instructions continuously to 
keep all parts of the plant operating at maximum efficiency. It will have a better grasp of what is 
happening second by second throughout the entire factory than any boss could possibly have. It never 
takes a coffee break or goes to the bathroom. The computer that controls this cybernated cleaning fluid 
plant will, among other things, send out orders for chemicals, bottles, labels, and other materials before 
they are needed. It will automatically shut down the plant or speed up the production depending on the 
need for the product. The computer will quickly spot any breakdown and order repairs instantly. It will 
maintain a continuous inventory.
Cybernation means that automated machines do all the work with a computer as the boss. The computer 
"boss" coordinates all activities in the plant so that no executives, secretaries, foremen, or other 
supervisory personnel are needed. A self-repairing, cybernated factory may operate 24 hours a day, 365 
days per year without a single human. If a human were present, he would probably spend his time looking 
at dials and fighting boredom. The small crew that even today operates a modern cybernated oil refinery 
could do their work in dinner jackets and white gloves without soiling them!
"Ultimate automation based on atomic power," said Albert Einstein, "will make our modern industry as 
primitive and outdated as the stone age man looks to us today." It is possible to build an automobile plant 

in which the raw materials are automatically put in one end and shiny automobiles run out another end, 
untouched by human hands. Cybernated systems that use almost no human labor can be developed to 
produce everything we use from the food we eat to the homes we live in.
Goods and Services Without Labor
Now, what does cybernation do to the shirt that we previously discussed which might take one hundred 
hours to produce without machines? If all raw materials are mined, raised, or gathered by cybernated 
machinery, and if shirts are produced in a cybernated factory without human beings, just how much labor 
is involved in the production of a shirt? It is conceivable that only five seconds of human time per shirt 
might be enough.
Further improvements might get this below one second per shirt. How much would a shirt be worth under 
these circumstances? Five cents? One cent? One-tenth of a cent? Would it be worthwhile even to worry 
about charging for a shirt if there were practically no human labor involved in its production or distribution?
Since any task done by human minds and human hands can theoretically be cybernated on a repetitive 
basis, the advance of modern technology will almost eliminate the human labor cost of services. Services 
such as dry cleaning are now being automated. In the future haircuts, manicures, beauty parlor services, 
laundry, and the servicing of automobiles will be performed on a cybernated basis. The ability of 
cybernated machines has been described by Donald N. Michael:
Cybernated systems perform with a precision and a rapidity unmatched in humans. They also 
perform in ways that would be impractical or impossible for humans to duplicate. They can be built 
to detect and correct errors in their own performance and to indicate to men which of their 
components are producing the error. They can make judgments on the basis of instructions 
programmed into them. They can remember and search their memories for appropriate data, 
which either has been programmed into them along with their instructions or has been acquired in 
the process of manipulating new data.Thus, they can learn on the basis of past experience with 
their environment. They can receive information in more codes and sensory modes than men can.  
They are beginning to perceive and to recognize.*
*Donald W. Michael, "Cybernation: The Silent Conquest" (Santa Barbara, California: Center for the  
Study of Democratic Institutions, 1962), p. 6.
Humans will not even be required to maintain the factories of the future. Cybernated factories will be 
designed to operate for many decades without repair by men. Routine maintenance and repairs will be 
performed by machines. Improved metals and designs of the future will make machines almost 
impervious to wear and tear. Even today Western Electric makes complex switches that work so 

flawlessly that a single failure in five million operations is considered below par. Some relays now in use 
will perform a billion switching operations in their lifetime.
The Human Use of Human Beings
Dr. Norbert Wiener, the "Father of Cybernetics," wrote:
It is a degradation to a human being to chain him to an oar and use him as a source of power; but 
it is almost an equal degradation to assign him purely repetitive tasks in a factory, which demand 
less than a millionth of his brainpower.
The advent of cybernation may be regarded as an emancipation proclamation for mankind. Its thorough 
application will at least enable man to have the highest conceivable standards of living with practically no 
labor. It will free him for the first time from a highly structured and outwardly imposed routine of repetitive 
day-by-day activity. It will permit him to return to the Greek concept of leisure where all work was done by 
slaves and men had time to cultivate their minds. In the future each of us will command a million slaves. 
These will be mechanical and electrical slaves, not the degrading use of a human being to do the work so 
that another may live an abundant life.
Computers are today in a very early stage comparable to the Model T Ford. At the present time the 
largest electronic computers have only about 1/10,000 of the associative powers of human beings. 
Computers today are generally programmed to operate in specific ways. We are only beginning to design 
them to observe a large range of outside data and creatively handle this information.
Although computers are just out of their teen years, some of them are already beginning to show a 
potential for originality.
"The present level of these learning machines," said Dr. Norbert Wiener :
is that they play a fair amateur game at chess but that in checkers they can show a marked 
superiority to the player who he programmed them after from 10 to 20 playing hours of working and 
indoctrination. They thus most definitely escape from the completely effective control of the man 
who has made them. Rigid as the repertory of factors may be which they are in a position to take 
into consideration, they do unquestionably --and so say those who have played with them-- snow 
originality, not merely in their tactics, which may be quite unforeseen, but even in the detailed 
weighting of their strategy.
* Norbert Wiener, "Some Moral and Technical Consequences of Automation" Science, Vol. 131,  
No. 3410, May 6, 1960, p. 1306 . Copyright 1960 by the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science. 

The micro-miniaturization of computer components may enable man to build computers in the future that 
will have a thousand times more associative power than any human brain. Computers will be designed 
that will have sensory receptors in all parts of the world which will give them immediate information on 
anything significant that occurs. A master computer in the future will be able to gather, digest, and analyze 
all recorded facts and information-a fantastic task that is impossible for any human being. The range of 
facts and formulas .s so extensive today that it is often impossible for a scientist to keep up with new 
developments even in his specialty.
Only a computer will be able to handle the integration of all knowledge and come up with decisions that 
will be based on the full range of relevant data. In the future computers will not only be able to think as 
well as men, they will be able to exceed man enormously in the capacity to digest facts and information.
They will analyze the data and come up with solutions to problems that will enable man to obtain what he 
wants on earth. It would be impossible to achieve the value system discussed in Chapter 4 without the 
thorough use of automated machinery and computers integrated into a world-wide cybernated complex.
Cybernation can transform our entire world into a Garden of Eden The goods and services that we desire 
will be available without repetitive human toil. And the Tree of Knowledge will bloom for the fulfillment of 
everyone. The biggest portion of the prime years of one's life will no longer be structured by the need for a 
weekly pay check. With cybernation household jobs will no longer saddle women with boring day-to-day 
routines.
Men and women will for the first time in their lives be free to inquire into their own needs, to face 
themselves, and to work out satisfying patterns of life based on their own feelings and thoughts. "The 
liberation of people from tasks unworthy of human capacity," said Gerald Piel, "should free that capacity 
for a host of activities now neglected in our civilization. . . ."*
* Gerald Piel, "Consumers of Abundance" (Santa Barbara, California: Center for the Study of Democratic 
Institutions, 1961), p. 9.
The rat-race will be over. Society will require relatively little from any of its members. John F. Kennedy's 
famous dictum, "Ask not what your country can do for you; ask what you can do for your country," will be 
reversed. People may for the first time enjoy an abundant life made possible by the creative intelligence of 
man. With a cybernated technology it will be possible for all humans to live better than if each person 
were to have a million slaves at his command. Even a millionaire today has a crude, harried life compared 
with the smooth, fulfilling pattern that all people may achieve in a cybernated society.
We have asked how you would like a guaranteed income of $100,000 per year. In the 1960's in the 
United States, the average family has had income of around $6,000 per year. However, when there is 
almost no human labor cost to producing cybernated goods and services, it will be possible for everyone 
to have almost anything in any quantity! One hundred thousand dollars per year or $1,000,000 per year—
it won't matter. Of course, with practically no labor cost and limitless nuclear energy, things won't have 
price tags. Prices are only a way of distributing the loot when there is not enough for everyone.
Man's future will be a thousand times more exciting than his past. For the first time man will be free to 
work out any system of values that he desires—and to achieve these values. For the first time man will be 
in a position to make a thorough application of the scientific method of thinking so that his knowledge has 

predictability—so that he can solve his problems and not just patch them up crazy-quilt fashion. For the 
first time it will be possible to have a cornucopia of goods and services that will not be obtained by the 
sweat of someone's brow.
"This is a time of transition. . . ," said Adlai Stevenson, "from the ancient problem of sharing scarcity to the 
modern problem of distributing abundance." Cybernated technology will for the first time permit us to 
realize our human potential. We may achieve the deepest measure of life; we may enjoy the highest level 
of liberty; and we may have maximum scope in our pursuit of happiness.
7.Away We Go!
In the next section we will leap into the twenty-first century. In previous chapters we have found that man 
escaped from the jungle a relatively short time ago. As might he expected he brought with him many 
primitive habits of thinking and feeling that still plague us today. We have discussed in detail the triple 
foundation on which we are making a projection of our twenty-first-century civilization. If you can accept 
our value system, if you feel that the scientific method of thinking will play a dominant role in the future, 
and if you understand the impact of a cybernated technology that will produce goods and services with 
practically no human labor, then we feel that you will find our projection thought provoking.
We do not believe it should necessarily take one hundred years to accomplish the technological and 
sociological changes that will provide mankind with this cybernated Garden of Eden. Some of the things 
we are anticipating may be well under way by the time this book is published. If the improvement of our 
society were given the same priority that the development of the atomic bomb was given during the last 
war, it would be possible to achieve most of the features we project for the twenty-first century in time for 
us to enjoy them during our lifetime. U Thant, Secretary General of the United Nations, said:
The truth, the central stupendous truth, about developed countries today is that they can have—in  
anything but the shortest run—the kind and scale of resources they decide to have. ... It is no 
longer resources that limit decisions. It is the decision that makes the resources. This is the  
fundamental revolutionary change—perhaps the most revolutionary man- kind has ever known.
Books and articles describing the future usually deal with space ships and other technological marvels 
and gadgets. They wisely stay away from upsetting the reader's values or challenging the age-old 
patterns by which he lives. People are not usu-ally threatened by technological change but they get 
emotional when someone proposes a social change. A twenty-year-old farm boy will join the Air Force 
and fly jet planes faster than the speed of sound. His grandparents below will hop into their 350 
horsepower chrome-plated monster and speed over the expressways. But it took over a century for a 
good part of the people in the United States to recognize that we should respond to human beings as 
individuals, instead of on a basis of race, creed, or color. And that battle, unfortunately, is still going on.
As we leap into the future, we must make every attempt to avoid being bogged down by tradition and the 

"wisdom" of the past. It is useless to try to fight change. It is much more fruitful for human beings to 
control and channel intelligently the accelerating flow of events. Over a half-century ago the United States 
Electric Light Company gave its dynamic inventor Hiram Maxim a $20,000 annual life pension and exiled 
him to England. They felt they needed to get rid of him because his brilliant mind kept inventing 
improvements. His creative ability made their equipment obsolete before they had time to pay for it. 
Maxim produced some of his greatest inventions in England. At the time that he was being knighted for 
his outstanding accomplishments, the United States Electric Light Company was going out of business.
Probably the only thing we can know for sure about the future is that it will be very different from what we 
have today. But whatever difficulty we may have in trying to understand life in times to come, it is little 
compared with the trouble people in the twenty-first century will have understanding the way we do things 
today. In the future people will find it almost impossible to believe that human beings could have 
organized themselves into nations and then could have used scientifically designed weapons to slaughter 
each other. As they watch movies of the past, they will be astounded by the tobacco smoke emanating 
from the nostrils and by the ostentatious clothing and dangling jewelry. They will find animal emotions of 
hostility and jealousy most incredible. Individuals in the twenty-first century will not look back with 
nostalgia to a world threatened by atomic oblivion, with economic and political activities vitiated by greed 
and hypocrisy, and with mental disorders growing at a phenomenal rate. How crude and pathetic we will 
appear in the eyes of our descendants !
Civilization Lightens Man's Burden
One measure of the degree of civilization at any given time is the extent to which it requires individuals to 
sacrifice themselves. In the past millions of men were required to sacrifice their lives during the recurrent 
wars. These individuals usually sacrificed themselves willingly, for they had been conditioned this way.
An Englishman once described America as, "A place where everybody furiously works overtime making 
labor-saving machinery." To operate the economy of industrial nations today, many individuals are 
required to sacrifice the prime portion of their lives in an eight-hour-per-day pattern of labor. They are 
conditioned so that they do not usually consider it a sacrifice. The work week is getting shorter. Some 
people in the preceding century had to work twice as many hours to make a poorer living.
Furthermore, working conditions are improving, fringe benefits increasing, time-and-a-half more common
—if not double time —vacations longer, and every now and then someone manages to convince himself 
that some part of his job is interesting. Men and women are working to get money to buy things they want, 
or they are working for recognition in terms of titles and achievements. But the fact remains that the prime 
portion of the lives of most twentieth-century men and many women is consumed by more or less 
compulsory, more or less monotonous, more or less repetitive, more or less boring tasks which are 
associated with a pay check.
The mature society of the future will burden man with a minimum of obligations. Most societies of the past 
and present could not operate unless its citizens were heavily committed and obligated to certain set 

patterns. But as we shall see, the automated world of the future will for the first time free mankind from 
these heavy obligations to the group. He will be able to face himself deeply and fundamentally. No longer 
will his parents, his boss, and his country tell him how he should act. Our future society will require 
minimal work, criticism will not be considered disloyalty, and diversity in sexual and family patterns will be 
possible.
In the future individuals will do most for their social group by developing themselves into dynamic, happy 
human beings. Men and women will ask themselves: "What fills me as a human being? What things add 
to my feeling of worth? What do I enjoy? What do I really need? What things make me feel intellectually 
vital, emotionally warm, and physically strong? What makes me feel ten feet tall, that life is glorious, and 
that today is wonderful?"
Steps to the Future
The rate at which we progress toward the better world of the future will depend upon how rapidly we use 
the scientific method to test out various solutions to our problems. In the past we have fired professors 
who advocated doing things that were different from the present mores of our tribe. In the future we must 
take these creative men and give them the facilities they need to test their ideas scientifically.
We must plan to increase the available power and energy in all parts of the world to enormously higher 
levels. Intelligence guided by scientific methodology must be applied to the technological and sociological 
reconstruction of our entire planet. A cybernated food production system must be designed to meet the 
needs of a stable world population. Areas must be set aside for industry that will be coordinated with a 
vast international transportation system. A product that is cybernetically manufactured anywhere on earth 
should be cybernetically delivered to almost any building on earth in less than twenty-four hours. We must 
open our eyes and minds to use to the fullest man's enormous ability to create. Knowledge is exploding. It 
is reported in Schools for the Sixties, a volume sponsored by the National Education Association that over 
the last 2,000 years, knowledge doubled for the first time by 1750, for the second time by 1900—(150 
years later) for the third time by 1950—(50 years later), and for the fourth time by 1960— (10 years later).
The world's supply of technical knowledge is now doubling every seven years. Most of the scientists who 
have ever lived are alive today. "By now," said Dr. A. C. Hall, the Defense Department's Deputy Director 
of Research and Engineering for Space, "we seldom doubt the technical feasibility of anything."
Dr. George Gallup in his book The Miracle Ahead has shown us the type of thinking that will enable man 
to achieve a maximum of "Life, Liberty and the Pursuit of Happiness." Dr. Gallup asks:
Can man perform the miracle of lifting himself to a higher  level of civilization?
The answer is Yes—unequivocally. Man is clearly in charge of his own evolution; he can proceed 
at a pace that he himself sets.
He can solve any problem that comes within his purview—even the problem of war. The great 
advances made in physical science can be paralleled in social science.

Man now has the procedures for dealing with the problems arising out of his social existence—
problems that the methods of physical science can not adequately explore or illuminate.
Man has scarcely begun to make use of his almost limitless brain power, either individually or 
collectively. Lack of progress in dealing with the affairs of mankind can be traced to a simple truth:  
man has never made a concerted and persistent effort to solve his social and political problems. 
His inventive genius has been confined almost exclusively to the production of better tools and 
instruments.
The next great move forward can now be taken. All that is required is a firm belief in man's great  
potentialities and a readiness to accept change.
Man is still young on the face of the earth; civilization is still in its infancy. Homo sapiens has not  
yet realized his strength and his greatness; nor does he see, except dimly, the heights to which 
civilization can reach.*
* George Gallup, The Miracle Ahead (New York, Evanston and London: Harper & Row, 1964), p. 
203.
Mankind today is in a period of challenge and opportunity. Fascinating, unexplored territory lies before us. 
The explorations of Columbus will seem like child's play in comparison. By joining the forces of science 
and technology throughout the world in a common endeavor, we can eliminate man's inhumanity to man. 
We can reconstruct the whole of the world environment to give every person on earth what he needs to 
live a fulfilled, abundant life. We can build a new society with sufficient flexibility to correct its own errors 
and to meet any challenge that lies ahead. In the future no individual will ever stand alone. The unlimited 
horizons of the humanistic-scientific-cybernated future will be the most exciting adventure in the history of 
mankind.
PART II
A Projection of Our Future
8. At Home in the Twenty-first Century
Scott and Hella have been asleep two hours. They will probably awaken in about an hour. In the previous 
century it was considered normal for people to waste about one-third of their lives sleeping. One way to 
attack the problem of increasing the effective life-span has been to make two or three hours of sleep as 
effective as eight or nine hours previously was. Several genetic improvements, an increase in oxygen in 

the sleeping chamber, plus the development of deeply relaxed personalities almost free of hostility and 
tension has proved successful.
Further genetic improvements are expected to minimize even more the amount of sleep required. The 
reduction, if not elimination, of sleep is not desired for its own sake. This world of the latter part of the 
twenty-first century is stimulating and challenging. There is so much to do and see. The limitless 
intellectual horizons, the esthetic delights, and the sensual feelings are too many and varied to be fully 
savored in the average lifetime of 200 years.
Although Scott and Hella are asleep, they are surrounded by great dynamism. Everything around them is 
being controlled by their home computer, known as the cybernator. This small computer is built into the 
wall and they never see it although it is in use every minute of the day. They have gradually trained their 
cybernator to meet their needs in thousands of ways. Through the cybernator Scott and Hella can verbally 
command any mechanism in their apartment. The cybernator also handles their messages to the 
Correlation Center.
The automated bed upon which Hella lies nude and unrestricted by clothing, sheets, or blankets, 
responds in a living way to support her body. There are no pressure points, no creases. This soft 
membrane gradually moves in a rhythm and pattern that over the years has proved to be most relaxing to 
Hella. The rhythm that is most relaxing to Scott during sleep is slightly different and the cybernator is also 
attending maximally to his needs. Since people change, the input sensors of the cybernator in the 
apartment are constantly scanning to explore whether they would have more relaxation if the sleeping 
membrane were to undulate in a different manner.
If Scott and Hella were to have a thousand servants, they would not receive the services that are 
available to them through the cybernator. Not only are the undulations of the bed constantly adapted to 
meet their needs, but other aspects of their sleeping chamber are being maintained by the cybernator to 
give maximum restfulness and comfort. A controlled, ionized atmosphere adds to their feeling of well-
being. The temperature, humidity, mixture of air, and background music are constantly being adjusted to 
meet their individual needs at the moment. If one of Hella's feet drops three degrees below her optimal 
temperature range, an infra-red beam immediately brings it back to the desired level.
Sleep in the twenty-first century is no longer a haven from the trials and tribulations of the day—"the balm 
of tired minds". Scott and Hella have never experienced nightmares—these are part of the long list of 
things about previous centuries that they are really unable to understand except on an abstract level. In 
the past centuries, conflicts produced tension-filled lives that were temporarily relieved by alcohol and 
tranquilizers. The repressions and injustices of the day were expressed at night as disturbing dreams and 
nightmares. In Scott and Hella's world one's feelings and impulses are accepted both in thought and 
action so that hours of sleep are not vitiated by the romping of repressed feelings. Scott and Hella rarely 
dream, but when they do, their dreams usually revolve around pleasant things they plan for the next day.
Scott and Hella's lives are not governed by rigid schedules. There are practically no deadlines, and there 
is no need for them to awake at any particular time. The sensing extensions of the cybernator are able to 
determine when their bodies have absorbed all the rest they needed. Gradual changes are made that will 
prepare them to awaken with a full-of-energy feeling. The temperature of the sleeping chamber is reduced 
several degrees. The lighting of the chamber is increased and background music of a type enjoyed by 

Scott and Hella in the morning will soon begin.
As Scott and Hella awaken, they have a feeling of anticipation. A new day is here. New and interesting 
thoughts with new beauties to be experienced and new sensations are to be felt! Lying together for the 
first few minutes of the day, Scott and Hella chat warmly about their feelings and plans. They decide to 
talk to some friends who live 10,000 miles away. They give verbal commands to the cybernator which 
makes a connection with the Correlation Center that is immediately relayed by satellite to their friends. 
They are able to exchange experiences and thoughts via a three-dimensional color transmission. They 
feel as close as if they were together in the same room.
The Cybernated Hygiene Area
With kitten-like playfulness Hella slaps Scott on the buttocks and runs toward a cylindrical chamber. Scott 
catches her just as she reaches the entrance to the twenty-first-century bathroom.
Although she is forty years old, Hella looks like a young girl of eighteen. She has light brown hair with 
sparkling brown eyes. Her mouth is expressive and perfectly spaced teeth show when she laughs. Her 
breasts are firm and slightly smaller than the average of previous centuries. Her hips are beautifully 
formed but not wide. Her buttocks and thighs are softly rounded. Laughingly, Scott pulls her inside the 
cylindrical walls of the shower. Air and water, mixed under pressure to form a soft, cleansing spray, 
delightfully comb every part of their bodies at a speed and pressure that they have taught the cybernator. 
No soap is used; ultrasonically activated water loosens any clinging particles. This bath not only cleans 
their bodies but also furnishes the most delightful tactile sensations with sprays that tingle and massage 
every part of them.
Scott is about the same height as Hella. His handsome face responds to the stimulating shower. Like 
Hella, Scott does not look his forty-five years. He begins to sing in a resonant voice. Hella, in self-defense, 
harmonizes with him with a vibrant tone. Scott and Hella have almost equally strong muscles. They move 
gracefully and gently in a way that suggests hidden strength. They are dried in three seconds as they 
walk through the air wall that acts as a shower door. This air wall is a high-speed sheet of warm air jetted 
from the top, bottom, and sides of the shower opening. While they are in the shower, the sleeping 
chamber automatically cleans and sterilizes itself.
Scott and Hella then lean their heads backward to fit into a niche designed to groom their hair. In forty-
three seconds this cybernated beauty shop trims the hair and arranges it in any mode that Scott and Hella 
select. Over the years they have trained the cybernator in the patterns that they prefer for their hair. The 
job of grooming is performed by an electronic complex that sets the hair by beamed positive and negative 
electrostatic charges. A one-second, modified laser emission gives a permanent set that remains until a 
different style is desired. Hella seldom uses rouge, eye shadow, eyebrow pencil, or other artificial 
techniques of past centuries. The people in the new civilization are no longer physiologically and 
psychologically exhausted by insoluble problems, emaciating responsibilities, atmospheric pollution, and 
poor nutrition. Neither men nor women care for artificial decoration. They feel beautiful and attractive in 
themselves. Their loveliness comes from inside—no outside veneer is needed.

At this time shaving has disappeared. Hair no longer grows in areas where humans do not want it. No 
mouth washes or irritating chemical agents are used that might affect the living tissues of the mouth. 
Cavities are unknown, for there has been an increase in the hardness of the enamel, and foods are 
designed to inhibit decay of the teeth and disease of the gums. Because of the high degree of intestinal 
health, bad breath is almost unknown.
The lavatory and toilet are recessed in a corner of the bathroom area. The water turns on whenever the 
hands are placed above the lavatory. In toileting, the individual sits upon a soft ring covering a soundproof 
bowl. During elimination or defecation the waste matter, together with all odors, is drawn into an opening. 
Instead of towels or tissues there are water sprays which automatically clean the rectal and pubic areas, 
and warm air rapidly dries them. This natural function is no longer unattractive as in previous centuries.
A Medical Checkup
Scott and Hella step into a cabinet and automatically trigger a ten-second series of tests that help them 
achieve the highest level of health. The mechanism records their weight so that the cybernator can check 
gain or loss. If an upward trend in weight appears over a period of time, the cybernator orders the food 
production mechanism to decrease the calories without making any noticeable change in the bulk or taste 
of the food. The cabinet also measures blood pressure differentials throughout the body. It produces an 
electrocardiogram and instantaneously compares it with previous electrocardiograms. The blood in 
capillaries on the retina of the eye is given a spectro-analysis. The heartbeat, respiratory rate, brain-wave 
activity, and many other measurements are made and instantly compared with long-term norms for the 
individual. The cybernator does not over-respond to individual readings of any specific day but, instead, 
analyzes them for physiological trends. The Correlation Center compares them with norms based on over 
two billion people.
Almost everything that happens in the human body is accompanied by electrical and chemical changes 
that can be picked up and recorded by the advanced medical engineering of the twenty-first century. The 
casual ten seconds spent in this medical cabinet give Scott and Hella a daily checkup that may add years 
to their lives. All colds, viruses, and infectious diseases have been eliminated for many years. Only long-
term deterioration of body organs is still a problem.
When necessary, conditions in their environment are altered to help them maintain optimal health. Many 
of the environmental changes, such as the adjustment of calories to preserve optimal weight, are 
performed automatically. Every effort is being made by medical technicians to automate all conditions 
involving health so that no conscious control is necessary to achieve the highest level of energy and 
longevity.
Scott and Hella walk into the dressing area and hold out their arms. Their garments release themselves 
from hangers and adhere to their bodies. Their measurements are stored in the Correlation Center. 
Whenever they need a garment, the cybernated machines tailor a unique one for them in the style and 
material they select.

The clothing is extremely thin and soft, yet it has great strength and flexibility. The material lives, 
breathes, and reflects— or absorbs—light and heat as needed to keep the body temperature even. 
Through energy generated from light, the material obtains electrical potential required to operate the 
garment's electromechanical responses. It has no bulging surfaces or tension-producing areas of stress. 
In any scuff contact a flow of electro-migratory materials maintains the garment in constant repair.
The material can assume any color or become transparent. The clothes clean themselves and usually do 
not need attention during their expected ten-year life.
Delicate shoes that flex coordinately with the movement of the musculature of the foot are entirely free of 
local pressures or undesirable friction. They breathe as the wearer walks about.
The feet are maintained at the most comfortable temperature, regardless of the weather. A membranous 
material will migrate to any part of the shoe to enhance movement, comfort, durability, and wear. They are 
also self-cleaning.
Snack on the Balcony
Scott and Hella often eat on the balcony that overlooks the naturally lovely wooded areas of the twenty-
first-century cities. Over 83 per cent of the land in the cities is maintained as park and recreation areas. 
For the past forty-two years all the cities have had full weather control. The Correlation Center arranges 
for the degree of variation from season to season that people find most pleasant. Rain, snow, and 
windstorms no longer inconvenience people in urban communities.
Scott and Hella live in a circular, multi-story apartment building that is over a mile in diameter. It contains 
300,000 living-units designed to meet human needs in every possible way. All walls, doors, and windows 
are soundproof. The nearest building they can see from their balcony is about a half-mile away. Few 
suburban homes of the past, even if built on forty acres of land, offered the absence of distractions they 
are able to enjoy.
As they make themselves comfortable on the balcony, they give vocal commands to the cybernator which 
produces the food they have ordered in five seconds. As a part of their training to live in the twenty-first-
century world, Scott and Hella have become familiar with 325 selections of food. These selections seem 
to encompass fairly well the entire range of taste, smell, and texture combinations that most people enjoy. 
It has been found that three basic food mixtures can be electronically altered in one second's time to give 
variations in color, taste, and texture that make up any desired menu.
In an experiment several years ago some twentieth-century foods, as prepared by gourmet restaurants in 
various cities of the world were offered to a group of twenty-first-century people. They found the twentieth-
century food lacking in taste depth, nutritionally insufficient, and actually harmful in some ways.
Scott and Hella do not use the primitive knife, fork, and spoon of former times. Their exotic foods are 
picked up by a glass-like rod that is charged electrostatically so that portions of food adhere to it. They do 

not have to penetrate the food; they simply bring the glass rod near it. There is no dripping or dropping of 
food. By varying the charge at the tip, even liquids adhere. When they complete their meal, the 
implements and dishes are lowered into the table, where they are automatically cleaned and sterilized.
The Dynamic Living Area
After breakfast Scott and Hella go to the largest room in their apartment. Half of this room is devoted to a 
teleprojection area large enough for life-sized, three-dimensional figures. An index scanner enables Scott 
and Hella to select whatever they enjoy most—concerts, plays, current events, informative subjects. The 
world's forests are no longer being chewed up to make newspapers. All past or present news is available 
on the telescreen, and reusable electrostatic copies can be made if desired. The cybernator in their 
apartment has already made a list of the programs of the day. It has put a red dot beside the type of 
program that Scott prefers and a yellow dot beside the type that Hella usually selects.
Scott and Hella nestle in a contour chair as they activate the three-dimensional teleprojection area. This 
contour chair acts as a living support that produces a comfort previously unknown. If Hella raises her arm, 
the chair will extend itself upon command to support the arm in any position desired. Whenever the legs 
are moved, it grows to support them with balloon-like softness. It gives them a physical freedom when 
sitting or reclining. The furniture of previous times tended to force people to sit in predetermined ways. In 
the new world of the twenty-first century, the individual has the freedom to select.
Most of the mechanisms that free Scott and Hella from drudgery and permit them to be served as guests 
in their own home operate automatically. Push buttons, dials, and levers are seldom used. Almost every 
machine in the new world is voice-actuated and responds instantly to spoken orders.
The interior of the living room has a large, dome-shaped ceiling with soft, colorful lighting flowing without 
any visible source from all portions of the wall. All of the electronic mechanisms that control the interior of 
their apartment are built into the walls. There are no gadgets bulging out here and there. The eye meets 
only pleasing contours of an organically designed interior. The walls of the twenty-first-century living-units 
are capable of infinite variety. At times they appear transparent. At other times they seem opaque. Often 
they reflect color or combinations of color in pleasing blends and designs. Teleprojected pictures, 
sculpture, and flowers are tastefully distributed through the apartment. They automatically change each 
day. There are no locks on any doors. In a world of abundance and sanity, they have no function. Almost 
everything in the apartment is fireproof and free from deterioration and will remain so for the long life of 
the building.
The entire apartment is maintained and cleaned continually by automatic mechanisms silently operated 
by the cybernator. No brooms, vacuum cleaners, or other manual paraphernalia are needed. It is almost 
completely dust-free. All surfaces are gracefully contoured so that there are no cracks or corners to permit 
dust to gather. Most surfaces have an electrostatic charge that repels dust and keeps it floating in the air 
to be filtered out. Since the air pressure in the apartment is slightly higher than outside, no dust flows in.
All materials and mechanisms in the living area are designed to last over one hundred years. Scott and 

Hella probably cannot recall any inconvenience due to a mechanical failure. The outside walls and roof of 
the apartment building are made of ceramic-like materials which require no painting or maintenance and 
have a life expectancy in excess of 500 years.
The versatile living areas are the focal points of the intelligence of the world environment. They are 
connected electronically with the Correlation Center, which, in turn, is connected with practically 
everything on the planet. When Scott wishes, he can contact any region in the world. He can talk with 
almost anyone in the world at any time. It is possible for him to attend any conference, to observe almost 
everything going on in the world in three-dimensional, color teleprojection without leaving his apartment.
Not only does their apartment enjoy two-way communication throughout the world, but it is also connected 
to receive anything they want directly from any part of the globe. Stores and shopping centers are 
regarded as inconvenient folkways of pre-twenty-first-century civilizations. When Scott and Hella want any 
personal item or any apparatus, they need only order their cybernator to produce three-dimensional 
models for their selection. Sometimes a basic model may have hundreds of optional attachments. This 
gives them an opportunity to order a customized version that meet their needs exactly.
When they select what they want, their cybernator immediately communicates this to the Correlation 
Center. In less than a second the order is registered at the nearest industrial complex. Within minutes this 
item is fabricated, packaged, and sent on its way in a high-speed system of tubes twenty feet in diameter. 
This high-speed package is electronically guided by the symbols representing Scott and Hella's address. 
Their package travels at the rate of 250 miles per hour until it arrives at their apartment.
During the entire process not one human hand or brain has been involved in filling their order. It is 
possible that the object they have ordered is unique in the entire world, for perhaps no one else has 
ordered that particular combination.
There is no scarcity of anything. Scott and Hella are free to order as much as they wish, for no human 
lives are consumed in meeting their needs. Whatever they want results only in a momentary blip in the 
cybernated machine complex of the twenty-first century.

Living   room   of Scott and Hella's apartment  
The group is watching a three-dimensional 
teleprojection. The panel on the right contains 
facilities for shopping and rapid delivery, delicious 
instant food. sending and receiving information, etc. 
Linear-acceleration train
This train is magnetically propelled on a cushion of 
air at 2,000 miles per hour. It has no engine or 
wheels. The electrostatically charged point reduces 
air resistance. Its safe cybernated operation 
requires no personnel. 
Floating research vessel
Children as young as five years participate in 
interesting research projects such as this 
oceanographic research vessel's analysis of 
currents near the Bering Strait dam. Trains 
connecting the continents travel through the upper 
tube.
Cybernated freighters 
These rust-free titanium vessels load and unload 
themselves and navigate to any port without 
captain, crew, or dock workers They carry enough 
atomic fuel to power the ship for fifty years.

A twenty-first-century car
These wheelless cars glide quietly and safely while 
people relax You state where you want to go, and 
they guide themselves without attention. They are 
refueled every five years and usually operate 
twenty years without repairs. 
Ion-propelled aircraft
This pilotless aircraft picks up Scott and Hella from 
the top of their apartment and cybernetically 
transports them to the Exuma Islands It is equipped 
with the comforts and conveniences of the twenty-
first-century apartments.
Power and research center 
The nuclear power plant that Hella visits lies 300 
feet below the central dome that contains the 
computer complex. Domed laboratories branch off 
from the center and are conveniently 
interconnected.
City design
Each of these spaciously designed fifteen-story 
living complexes overlooks natural areas of forests 
and lakes that are a minimum of one-half mile wide 
by one mile long. Transportation is handled in 
underground raceways.

Industrial production
A continuous stream of levicars is silently 
electroformed in one of the 1,000-foot flow 
lines. All objects are formed molecularly as a 
whole instead of being fabricated in parts and 
then assembled as in the pre-cybernated 
age. 
Corcen
This six-foot sphere which serves as the 
world correlation and knowledge bank has 
trillions of inputs from all over the globe that 
enable it to serve every individual and 
coordinate the humanized man-machine 
symbiosis.
From the Moon
Scott and Bella's observation dome overlooks the 
laser-cut excavation in the rock which protectively 
Suburban home
This home (including terrace) is electroformed in 
one piece and set in place by a cargo levicraft. 

encloses the multi-level interior environment. In 
place of exterior doors, there is a system of 
translucent thermal barriers.
Although cybernetically produced, the limitless 
choice of design elements and equipment make it 
uniquely individual.
Fulfilling Interests 
Scott has strong interest in medical engineering. A writer in the twentieth century would have said that 
medicine was Scott's "profession". In the new world, this terminology is not appropriate since the primitive 
system of jobs, wages, fees, and money has been outgrown. Scott finds the human body and its myriad 
mechanisms particularly fascinating. He enjoys playing a part in experiments designed to yield data that 
helps people attain the highest possible level of health. Doctors now study health, not disease. Instead of 
finding out what causes disease, they concentrate on finding out what factors produce the highest 
possible level of health. The parts of the body that were subject to frequent breakdown, such as the 
appendix, were eliminated many decades ago by improvements in the genes that blueprint the human 
body. 
Eight months ago the Correlation Center selected Scott and medical scientists from Asia, South America, 
and Europe to conduct experiments and report on the desirability of increasing the sensitivity of the 
humans near to 30,000 cycles. Human hearing is limited to a range of about 20 to 20,000 cycles per 
second. Some animals, such as dogs, can hear higher-pitched sounds. If Scott's committee feels that 
human well-being would be increased by an addition to the auditory range, research will be conducted 
toward this end. They already know which DNA manipulation are needed to produce the higher range of 
hearing. Perhaps in five years a pilot study with 1,000 individuals in different parts of the earth will be 
tried. If a richer pattern of life results, perhaps 5 per cent of the infants will be so equipped. If results 
continue to be favorable, this genetic improvement may be generally adopted for future babies of the 
twenty-second century. If there is any question about the feasibility of a projected improvement, or if 
difficulties later arise, the flexible scientific attitude results in rapid corrections. Nothing is regarded as 
final.
During his lifetime Scott knew people who were born in the twentieth century. He considered them 
"culture-bound." They were so bewildered by the flexibility of the new generations! They kept saying, "It 
isn't right to do this. If nature had wanted things that way, she would have made them that way. You have 
no respect for truth." Scot believes that the test of all things is the happiness they yield. He knows that 
mental straight-jackets limit one's ability to work out patterns of life that are broadly fulfilling.
Perhaps for the first time in human history, people are not bound tightly by the forms of a culture. In the 
past individuals who did not observe the mores of their particular culture were subjected to penalties that 
varied from disapproval to death. Scott's generation encourages diversity; they try to avoid getting into 
personal or social ruts. 
In the nurseries children enjoy games that help develop complete flexibility in going from one system to 
another. They know that two plus two in many situations equals four. They do not want to be rigidly bound 
by this. They want to know the hidden assumptions that lie behind this ' 'self-evident" formula. Children 

enjoy finding ways in which two plus two is not equal to four. Much of life is not additive. If two mouthfuls 
of a food are pleasant, it does not follow that four mouthfuls will give twice as much pleasure. The 
pleasure may decrease even more with six mouthfuls. Twelve mouthfuls might be unpleasant. "I 
remember once discovering a life situation in which two plus two equaled zero," Scott says. 
The free minds of the twenty-first century challenge everything that seems self-evident. They like to try on 
mentally different points of view. They search for their hidden assumptions and delight in bringing them to 
the surface. They are experts at changing their minds. "There are many people I especially like because 
they do not share my points of view," Hella says. "I enjoy talking with them when they vigorously defend a 
position that contradicts mine. I know I learn more when I find people with ideas that challenge mine." 
The Morning: Conference
Hella enjoys studying human relationships. She has asked the Correlation Center to indicate useful things 
she can do. She has been appointed to a committee that is studying the degree to which privacy in living 
areas adds or detracts from the human happiness potential. They are gathering data on what proportions 
of the population seem to achieve maximum fulfillment in those apartments that offer privacy versus those 
apartments that are shared by varying numbers of people. There is some evidence that self-selected 
groups of six people offer greater conversational variety, increased vicarious appreciations, and 
significantly enriched intellectual, esthetic, and sensory experiences. Larger groups may have a degree of 
superficiality and confusion that has drawbacks. 
It is recognized that if each individual is to have a maximum of "Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of 
Happiness," there must be opportunities from full privacy to full community participation in all activities. 
One should be able to choose whatever meets his needs best at the time. All planning is determined by 
the varied and changing preferences of individuals, not by what someone else thinks is "good for them." 
Both Scott and Hella plan to confer with their respective colleagues on these scientific matters during the 
latter part of the morning. At the prearranged time the telescreens come to life. Scott in his portion of the 
room and Hella in hers talk with their associates throughout the world. A table is in the foreground of the 
screen and the people appear in the far-flung conference telescreens as though seated in a semicircle. 
At one point in Scott's conference it is necessary to telecommunicate with a scientist on a space station. 
Later, they need the results of an experiment on hearing conducted eighty years previously. A request is 
made of the Correlation Center for this information. Within moments the data is presented upon the 
screen. The Correlation Center has recorded every book, document, and report that has ever been 
preserved in the history of the world. This information—classified, cross referenced, summarized, and 
evaluated—is available at all times. The proceedings of this conference are also recorded into the vast 
memory banks of the Correlation Center.
After their conferences Scott and Hella leave the main living area. Their chairs silently fold away and 
retract into the floor. They return to the balcony and recline upon a huge circular surface which 
automatically contours itself to their bodies and orients to the most suitable position to absorb filtered 
sunlight. The cybernator senses the mood of Scott and Hella and immediately provides a delightful 
fragrance of flowers with a background of stimulating music. Scott and Hella tenderly touch each other. 
He kisses her shoulders and she responds. They both begin to breathe deeply as they enjoy a multi-

dimensional experience that culminates in an ecstatic sexual climax. 
As they relax automatic units gently massage their bodies. These units do not have any extensions or 
projections. They are electronic means that project gentle contractions into the musculature of the body. 
All points of the body can be gently or forcefully massaged at the same time, depending upon the training 
that one has given the cybernator that serves him. Scott and Hella's muscles are stimulated to develop 
and maintain strength. As the massage becomes gentler, it gradually lulls them to sleep. 
Although they live in a voice-actuated environment designed to meet their needs, they are resourceful, 
capable individuals. They enjoy muscular activity. Since the cybernated machines protect them from 
boring, repetitive drudgery, they are unburdened and hence able to enjoy exertion. They often walk 
several miles in preference to using a cybernated car. 
While Scott and Hella are asleep a friend calls. There is no jangling phone to awaken them, for the 
sensing devices in their environment know they are asleep and report this. The friend communicates his 
message to the three-dimensional recorder, which is promptly played for Scott and Hella when they 
awake. 
Since it is possible to communicate quickly with any person on earth, no matter where he is, there is no 
problem in returning the call. They invited him to drop by that evening. 
Scott and Hella feel a complete freedom to explore new areas of thinking and feeling. They want their 
values and interests to change so that they may experience a multi-dimensional life. As they seek newer 
and deeper areas of feeling and thinking, the cybernator senses these altered patterns and responds 
appropriately. Just as an English butler learned in previous centuries to pick up the moods and needs of 
his employers "intuitively," so the cybernators are designed to grasp totally the sensitivities of the people 
they serve. They sense almost in advance what each person will want. They furnish whatever concert, 
symphony, or other type of entertainment would best suit the need of each individual they serve. The 
cybernators never determine what humans should have or want. They always seek to provide what will 
best meet the needs of individuals from clues given by the pattern of past choices. 
Although Scott and Hella are aware of the functions of the cybernator, they interact with it in a highly 
impersonal way. In the hidden mechanism in the walls, there are built-in, duplicate parts that 
automatically bypass any defective units in an instant without interruption of service. 
The living patterns Scott and Hella prefer can be instantly transferred to any other living unit they visit. 
Their cybernator is connected to the Correlation Center so that any living unit throughout the world can 
immediately request instructions on the various patterns an individual prefers. Thus everyone in the 
twenty-first century feels at home wherever he is—in a space ship, an apartment in the Himalayas, or a 
living unit at the bottom of the sea. As Scott once expressed it, "The world is my home." 
A Visit to Sumatra 
During the afternoon Scott mentions a place in Sumatra he had once visited. On voice command, there 

emanates from the walls a teleprojection of a scene from Sumatra. As these images change, Scott and 
Hella experience the smell of the forest, the green leaves of the jungle, and the animal life. These 
perfected teleprojection images can not be distinguished from the real objects. 
The living area is at once transformed. Hanging vines and the lush tropical vegetation of the jungles of 
Sumatra appear in life-sized, three-dimensional color. Birds fly through their living area, and animals walk 
by, apparently within reach of Scott and Hella. They appear quite solid, and one can hear the flapping of 
bird's wings and the soft padding of an animal's paws. The sea life and beaches appear in full reality. 
With gentle breezes caressing their faces, Scott and Hella feel immersed in the breaking waves, and 
colorful tropical fish that surround them and occasionally seem to touch them. If there is anything they 
wish to see again or want enlarged, they have only to command the cybernator. They watch underwater 
plants shimmer past them and see reflections of sunbeams coming down through the water with 
iridescent shadows. 
The newscast during the late afternoon briefly discusses signals received from outside the solar system. 
A particularly strong transmission is currently being monitored from a star some twenty-six light-years 
away, near the center of our galaxy. Apparently, intelligent beings are beaming strong signals toward 
earth. The linguistic system has not been cracked, but the computers are working on it. How soon will 
they contact other beings in the universe? 
Sharing With Friends 
Toward evening the cybernator alerts Scott that their friends will be there soon. Sonji and Jahn arrive in a 
pilotless levitator. It is propelled by highly energized ion particles that are emitted from the underside of 
the craft in a constant stream. This enables it to go up or down or be propelled in any direction desired. 
The levitator is not a flying machine. It does not depend upon air currents or any noisy unreliable devices 
such as propellers, wings, or ailerons. As it gently alights on the balcony, the guests appear to walk 
through its side, for there are no doors, cracks, or visible openings. Through verbal command the 
molecular bond of a portion of this outer skin yields to permit them to leave. The cybernator greets the 
guests and automatically guides them to the area where they are received by Scott and Hella. They make 
themselves comfortable on the responsive furniture. 
These guests are not attracted to Scott and Hella for inconsequential chatter or the social consumption of 
alcohol. Jahn is engrossed in reconstructing biological organisms that roamed the earth in the distant 
eons of the past. Sonji is part of a team devising electronic means to propel rats, flies, and other 
undesired forms of life from a five-mile belt surrounding all of the cities of the globe. They excitedly 
exchange ideas pro, con, back, and forth. 
Creative Recreation 
There are many games with physical or intellectual challenge from which to choose. This evening Scott 
suggests they play a game of Intellectronics. The three-dimensional, teleprojection mechanism is turned 
on, and they eagerly don headsets with sensitive electronic pickups. The teleprojection area comes alive 
with a visual representation of the innermost feelings of each individual, somewhat similar to the 

oscilloscope projection of vocal sounds. The screen is filled with a three-dimensional, infinitely varied 
spectrum of color. By interacting with each other, they make sprays of color that extend and dance in 
space before them. The forms blend with one another and merge as totally different and exciting patterns. 
"What a novel thought! Who projected that? How surprising that this projection is so similar to mine." The 
game explores the innermost feelings of each participant. These electronic translations of the operation of 
the human mind are very meaningful to Scott, Hella, and their friends. If someone from previous centuries 
were to see them, they would appear abstract and meaningless. But to people who have had years of 
experience, this new imagery represents a sophisticated form of communication. Somewhat as an 
electroencephalogram operator in the twentieth century interpreted two-dimensional wavy lines, the 
participants of the new imagery are sharing a form of communication, involving the integration of motion 
and color interwoven in a symphonic sensorium. 
Home Movies 
After a pleasant evening with their friends, which has lasted until around four in the morning, Scott and 
Hella retire to their sleeping chamber. Suddenly, Scott remembers some three-dimensional color 
recordings he and Hella made in their sleeping chamber on a recent visit to the moon. Since the moon 
has only one-sixth of the gravitational pull of the earth, they weighed only about 20 pounds. With the full 
muscle strength designed for earth's gravitation, they were able to interact sexually with each other in 
ways that would be impossible on earth. 
Upon command the cybernator projected these movies on the screen of their sleeping chamber while 
Scott and Hella enjoy again their previous delights. As the movie draws to a close, the cybernator uses its 
repertoire to enhance the sexuality of Scott and Hella. The whole spectrum of their sensations is keyed to 
this undisturbed act of love. The music keeps pace with their physiological activities and sensations. 
Temperatures are automatically maintained to meet their needs. All of their innermost feelings are 
accentuated and co-ordinated toward the gripping climax. 
As they drift away into a restful sleep, the cybernator with its thousands of inputs throughout their entire 
apartment, maintains a constant surveillance over the well-being of Scott and Hella. They are the 
pioneers in a new age of social and individual symbiosis. It is an age in which a purposeful existence and 
a fulfilling life is shared equally by all. In six hours they will go to one of the fascinating underwater 
apartments built on a colorful Exuma reef. They sleep deeply to meet the opportunities of an exciting 
tomorrow. 
9. A Multi-Dimensional Life 
For some time Scott and Hella have been planning to visit an underwater resort in the Exuma Islands in 
the Bahamas. The cybernator automatically notifies the Correlation Center of their plans. Scott and Hella 
have no frenzy of last-minute packing to get ready for the trip. They simply leave with nothing in their 
hands. The entire world is their home, and they have no need to take anything with them. Food and drink 
will be available in the aircraft. Travellers in previous times were heavily burdened by baggage, but 

anything Scott and Hella need will be available wherever they go. Their important papers, photographs 
and mementos are fed into the Correlation Center. They can be instantly retrieved any time or any place 
in the world. Soon retrieval on the moon will be possible. 
On Hella's command the cybernator calls for a 1,000 mile-per-hour ion-propelled craft. Within minutes the 
pilotless craft stops on the landing area on top of their apartment building. They enter and by vocal 
command give coded directions for the apartments in the Exumas. As the craft races at supersonic speed 
over the highest clouds, Scott and Hella relax in contour chairs and watch the unfolding panorama of the 
cloud formations. 
"Clouds are like hypotheses," muses Scott. "They're always changing." 
"I find change exciting," Hella reflects. "I wouldn't want to live in a static society, where things are 
regarded as absolute and final." 
"Well, I was thinking of the way men confused their notions of the world with reality," says Scott. "We 
know today that no theories are true or false—they are only more or less useful. They have more or less 
predictability." 
"Didn't Einstein recognize this in his Theory of Relativity?" asks Hella. 
"Exactly," says Scott. "Although it was fully accepted by scientists, he never said it was 'true.' He simply 
suggested that we use it if it has greater predictability than anything else. We'll throw it out if we can 
devise a theory that explains more facts and has greater predictability." 
"We can only use our creative imagination to think up ideas and hypotheses," adds Hella, "and then we 
must quietly measure and experiment to see which verbal garment best clothes the world around us. It's 
a never-ending process." 
As they lie on a responsive lounge discussing this aspect of scientific methodology, they are brought 
back to the here-and-now by the ten-minute landing signal. Now they begin to watch the water below. 
The coast of Florida with its silver lining of beaches recedes. The vibrant colors of the Bahama reefs 
appear, and, almost too soon, they arrive at their Exuma resort. 
The blue-green panorama is interrupted as their craft lands on the top of the Exuma City in the Sea. This 
building is a spectacular engineering achievement. A large ring, or circular dam, rises from the bottom of 
the sea, which is fifty feet deep at that point. The structure projects 100 feet above the surface. The top 
of the circular city automatically slides open in dry weather to uncover cybernetically maintained 
recreation areas and tropical gardens with dining facilities offering a variety of delicacies from the Exuma 
Sound. 
Scott and Hella select a room that is twenty-five feet below the surface. Large windows look out on the 
colorful underwater reef. When they enter their room, they instruct the cybernator for that unit to pick up 
the living patterns they have developed over the years with other cybernators in every place they have 
ever lived. Their preference for humidity, heat, light, music, food, and teleprojection program material are 
instantly available in their new home. 

No Price Tags
Nothing in the twenty-first-century world of Scott and Hella has a price tag. Prices were a distribution 
mechanism that was inevitable in the scarcity cultures of previous centuries. The cybernated production 
and distribution complex of the twenty-first century is capable of producing many times the flow of goods 
and services that people of the world require. The automated production capacity is so great that if 
everyone on the earth were suddenly to order a portable teleprojection set, such an unlikely demand 
could easily be met with only a short delay. 
In certain areas, however, there is a small "cost" to be paid, although neither Scott nor Hella thinks of it in 
these antiquated twentieth-century terms. They know that this underwater complex with 4,000 
apartments requires a continuous staff of three people to operate it. Since there is not a single paid 
employee in the entire twenty-first-century world, they know in advance that they may be expected to 
contribute an hour of their time for each month they stay. They look forward to contributing this service, 
for it furnishes them with new experiences. All jobs involving drudgery have long since been cybernated 
so they know they will not be asked to scrub floors or perform boring menial tasks. They will probably 
stand by to help in any way they are needed. Whatever they may be required to do, they know it will 
probably be interesting, if not challenging. 
Soon after arriving, they attend a one-hour teleprojection that gives information on the underwater 
complex. It shows some of the more popular types of activities; it outlines dangers and suggests certain 
precautions; it tells where and how to use underwater breathing apparatus and where to pick up their sub-
mobile. It locates the various underwater parks that are within a three-hour range of their submobile and 
shows how to use a special computer to communicate with the intelligent, trained dolphins and other 
animals in the sea. There are demonstrations of underwater photography and the use of ultrasonically 
propelled water skis. 
The teleprojection describes the magnetic field set up in the water on the north side of the building. Fish 
line up and swim toward the positive and negative poles of this electrical field. Pulses of high voltage herd 
them in groups toward a large funnel that sucks them into the cybernated processing plant. Aquatic plants 
are also grown in underwater fields, and the tops are harvested automatically, leaving the roots and lower 
third of the plant to grow a new crop without replanting. In various places throughout the world, local 
traditions often supplement the 325 varieties of food regarded as standard. 
When the teleprojection is over, Scott and Hella pick up their handbook and board the underwater 
sightseeing craft that takes them on a ninety-six-mile tour of this colorful reef area. They frequently leave 
the submobile and use their membrane masks to explore underwater caves and grottos. 
The Human Use of Time
That evening Scott and Hella join several men and women who are discussing some of the problems of 

the previous century. No introduction is ever needed in the new world. Everyone feels outgoing and 
friendly toward his fellow man. The need for introduction in previous centuries often served as a status 
shield that maintained distance between people. 
Myra, a petite blonde, is standing with her back to a large submarine window. She is the center of 
attention as she discusses the concern of their ancestors over the problem of what people would do with 
their lives when they didn't have to work. With vivacious movements she describes the dour predictions 
of the "emptiness of too much leisure." In a civilization of scarcity, it was customary for people to expect 
a life of unremitting toil and to develop "wisdom" based on this reality. 
"If all the year were playing holidays, to sport would be as tedious as to work," Scott says with a smile, 
quoting from Shakespeare. 
Anna, who is drying her hair with an air jet, remarks, "Historian Thomas Carlyle warned that 'a life of ease 
is not good for any man, nor for any god.' The folklore of the past was full of such admonitions as, 'Idle 
hands are the Devil's tools and idle minds, his workshop.' Our ancestors professed to have faith in 
humanity, yet they didn't trust people to direct their own lives." 
"How incredible," says Daryl, "that humans could be so conditioned that they would feel guilty if they were 
not engaged in repetitive toil." He ambles over to the window to join Myra. "Why should people ever feel 
guilty about anything?" 
"Somewhere around the mid-twentieth century," says Hella, "I recall that the Center for the Study of 
Democratic Institutions was studying the problem of what people would do with their spare time when they 
were no longer enslaved by the need to work for a weekly pay check. They invited Daniel Nugent, who 
lived on a hilltop nearby, to one of their weekly conferences. Nugent had owned a large department store 
in St. Louis, and he sold it out in 1916 when he was only twenty-seven. He retired in Santa Barbara and 
spent his days reading, studying, thinking, enjoying the loveliness around him, and using his money to 
help people. One by one the staff members in the conference room discussed the problems of what to do 
with leisure time in a world without work. 'What will happen when men's and women's lives are not 
structured for them? Can they make their own decisions? Can they use their own resources to build a 
worthwhile life?' Nugent sat there listening for a long while before he strongly protested, 'Gentlemen, I 
myself have not been gainfully employed for some 45 years—and I assure you there are not enough 
hours in the day.' " 
"Nugent was a smart man," observes one of the older men in the group. "He put his finger on our real 
problem. Our lives are just not long enough in spite of the reduced time now needed for sleeping. It is 
impossible for any individual to experience even one-thousandth of the world that we have today. And all 
of our horizons are constantly expanding so that as civilization goes on, it seems that the individual can 
experience less and less of it." 
"I agree," Hella responds. "Thomas Edison said, 'The stomach is the only part of a man which can be fully 
satisfied. The yearning of man's brain for new knowledge and experience . . . can never be completely 
met.' Perhaps if we could live 10,000,000 years we might find life boring. But Nugent was right—that 
certainly is not our problem today!" 

Everyone laughs at this last remark. Amazing how people can get worked up over problems that don't 
even exist! 
No Burdensome Possessions
After three weeks Scott and Hella realize they cannot leave soon. So many beauties, unique feelings, 
thoughts. Perhaps six months, perhaps a year would be enough. How could one decide in advance? 
They notify Central Correlation that they plan to remain here indefinitely. All conference calls and other 
communications are to continue to come to the Exumas, for they have cancelled their plans to return. 
They ask the Correlation Center to make their apartment available to other people. This is no problem, 
for Scott and Hella left no personal possessions there. In fact, they have few "personal" possessions. 
Whatever they want to use is available in any environment on earth. 
The entire concept of personal possessions belongs to the old scarcity societies. It isn't that Scott and 
Hella are forbidden to have them. They don't want them. They have no need for them. All of the things 
that people of previous societies used and which are still functional in the twenty-first century are 
structured into the environment. Suppose someone were to tell Scott, "Here is a pen. It belongs to you. 
You must take care of it and not let anyone take it away from you when you're not looking." Scott would 
give him a what's-going-on-here reaction. 
Besides, he has relatively little need to make marks on pieces of paper, for he can talk into the 
cybernator, and his words will be automatically recorded or printed. The finger-sized computer embedded 
in Scott's brain has sensory inputs that permit drawing by means of thought. If he wants to keep a copy of 
such a drawing, he instructs the cybernator to make a copy or to store the image he has created with his 
thought patterns. 
Anything Scott and Hella want can be rapidly produced to their personal specifications and usually 
delivered in several hours, no matter where they are—on the earth, below the earth, or in the satellites 
above the earth. They would regard it as an imposition if they had to regard certain things as their own— 
to keep track of them, to take them where they go so that they would have them available when needed, 
to make sure that they are properly serviced and in good working order. What a crude bother! In contrast, 
Scott and Hella have everything they need anywhere on earth. They are never concerned with taking care 
of any physical objects, for maintenance is cybernated. "The old concept of ownership sounds utterly 
barbaric," Scott once observed. "It's burdensome and boring." 
Artistic Expression Is a Part of Living 
Scott and Hella find themselves deeply moved by the color of the reefs and waters, the savage brutality of 
the more aggressive fish, and the graceful motion of the marine plants and animals. While Hella is visiting 
the observation deck high above the Exuma Sound, she has a desire to express her feelings in a three-
dimensional painting. She tells the cybernator of her wish to paint and walks over to a three- by four-foot 
panel. She picks up a lightweight instrument about three times the size of a pen. Through controlling the 

adjustment on this instrument, she is able to produce any color, or mixture of color, desired. Just as a 
sliding trombone can produce graduations of pitch, so her electronic brush can produce a thousand 
different hues and tints. Fine lines are drawn by holding it close to the screen. Broad lines are made by 
pulling it back. The pen can paint a flat, two-dimensional picture, or it can build up the material into any 
three-dimensional pattern desired. If Hella is dissatisfied with her work and wishes to start over, she has 
only to indicate so, and the cybernator will electronically erase it. When Hella is through with her painting, 
she instructs the cybernator to record it. If she especially likes it, she will order the cybernator to transmit it 
to the Correlation Center. 
Scott has a particular talent in sculpture, and he is inspired by the living forms surrounding him in the 
Bahamian waters. By using an electroformer, he is able to produce sculpture that in previous centuries 
might have involved days of hacking away at wood or stone. When he is satisfied with one of his 
productions, he orders the cybernator to send it to the Correlation Center. The physical structure of the 
sculpture is not moved, but through electronic scanning its contours and colors are recorded and 
transmitted. The Correlation Center schedules the exhibition of paintings and sculptures. Through three-
dimensional teleprojection Scott's sculpture will probably appear for ten-minute intervals in several 
apartments, walkway areas, and research laboratories during the next week. The degree to which it will 
appear again in other areas of the world and whether it will ever be shown at a Cultural Center depends 
on the amount of attention it receives as recorded automatically by attention scanners. 
If Scott or Hella were curious regarding the fate of their creations, they could ask their cybernator to 
request that information from the Correlation Center. They do not, however, produce these creations for 
the ego satisfaction of exhibiting them to others. They make them for their own pleasure. They create 
them because they have an inside need to express themselves. They produce them for the satisfaction of 
developing their artistic talents to a higher level. Whether anyone else in the world likes or dislikes their 
art is of little concern. Their main reason for transmitting their better products to the Correlation Center is 
to share with others something they feel would add slightly to the lives of fellow humans. 
The Achievement of Liberty
That evening Scott and Hella join a group attracted by the panorama seen through a transparent wall fifty 
feet under water. They are immersed in a living symphony of fish and plant life. As they soak up the 
details of this brilliantly lit section of the reef, they have deeper insights into their cultural heritage. They 
watch the wanderings of a small shrimp as it scans its environment for food. Suddenly a snapper darts 
past, opens its jaws—and whack! The shrimp is no more. One's attention is arrested by the graceful co-
ordination of the eight arms of a small squid. Suddenly a jack comes along and grabs it in the middle. The 
arms flail helplessly around the mouth of the jack. Then the jack is attacked by a barracuda, and the squid 
is immediately dropped as the jack flees for its life. The barracuda reaches down and grabs the now-
injured squid with its sharp teeth. In three shakes it is devoured. Scott and Hella are impressed by the 
ferocity of life in the marine jungle—the cruel workings of the survival of the fittest, the inevitable conflict 
that is brought on by scarcity.
"Blessed are the meek," Scott quotes. "But the meek may not survive in the jungle. If animals or people 

have to fight each other to get what they need, they become brutal. They have to be callous and heartless
—it would tear them apart if they empathized with the pain of others."
"How indebted we are to our ancestors for working through those primitive stages so we can at last live 
as human beings," remarks Hella as she watches a playful sergeant major darting around a lavender-
tinted lettuce coral. "They had the illusion of freedom—we have real freedom."
"Only recently have we been really free of the age-old ruts and routines," Scott continues. "Free from 
economic struggle, from aggressiveness in a million forms, from constant ego attack, and from always 
being told what to do. Even when our ancestors had enough food in their stomachs and had a roof over 
their heads, there was still a scarcity of love, affection, and emotional security to meet their ego needs."
"Yes," adds Hella, "and previous societies had intricate ways of giving status to people that enabled 
them to one-up the other fellow—to try to get a feeling of worth by showing that they were better in some 
ways than other fellow humans." 
"I suppose most of the problem revolved around scarcity," says Scott. "People must feel secure to give 
deeply to others."
"They tried to get security by passing laws," Hella smiles. "I understand that in previous centuries 
thousands of laws were passed each year telling people what they could and could not do."
"It's been years since taboos or laws were forced by society on the individual," Scott says. "Previous 
cultures used to label various things as right or wrong, good or bad, moral or immoral, lawful or unlawful. 
These things sometimes changed from one state to another, from one country to another, and certainly 
from one culture to another."
"We shouldn't be too proud," admonishes Hella. "It was only two decades ago that we were able to 
dispense with the last law, the last lawyer, and the last courtroom. Only in our age could we be sure that 
human beings could be fully trusted if they are reared in ways that avoid hostile conditioning. Happy, 
fulfilled people never commit crimes!"
"I'm not sure that it's all a matter of trusting people," counters Scott. "I'm not sure I could be trusted not to 
harm myself or someone else if I were put into one of the automobiles of the last century. We've used 
technology to avoid hurting ourselves or others. Try to imagine, Hella. They had no automatic controls. 
They sped along those narrow highways. The death rate was horrible, the injuries even worse. In the 
United States auto accidents killed more people each year than their wars! This slaughter was so 
unnecessary. It's been decades since one of our surface transportation units injured anyone." 
"The availability of the medium-range aircraft that we used to come here was shelved for four years until 
proximity control devices were perfected," says Hella. "This safety system reduces the probability of a 
crash to less than one chance in six trillion miles. The danger of a crash is more remote than being hit by 
lightning."
"Yes, I remember reading about the probabilities of a crash on the nameplate as we entered the craft," 
answers Scott. "There's no 'Big Brother' making decisions for us. We're given the facts and probabilities, 

and we make our own choices."
"Watching those fish out there," says Hella, "makes me realize how far man has come. We can truly be 
ourselves—think what we want, feel what we want, experience what we want—without hurting other 
people." 
Trip to an Underwater Park 
The next morning Scott and Hella take one of the submobiles and navigate to an underwater park about 
twenty miles away. On the way they see the forms of many wrecked ships, now deeply encrusted with 
coral. They play tag with a dolphin for a while. In their large bubble enclosure in the forward part of the 
sub-mobile, they have full visibility. Built-in televised binoculars with microviewers enables them to 
examine marine life in detail. They call the Correlation Center via relay satellite and request a summary of 
the scientific work now being done in oceanography. A briefing keyed to their intermediate level of 
understanding is given to them as they near the underwater park. 
In the park they find other submobiles. Scott and Hella having their underwater breathing membrane on, 
slip their feet into self-propelled fins, adjust their voice communicators, and exit through the air lock. For 
hours they explore the marine gardens and make three dimensional teleprojections with their laser 
cameras. They stay together so that they can help each other in case of emergency. Trained porpoises 
are there to assist if needed. 
On the way back from the park, Scott and Hella direct their submobile to navigate automatically. He helps 
her remove her fins and breathing membrane. Caressing her ear with his lips, he peels her underwater 
suit from her body. With a knowing smile she turns and sees that he has already removed his gear. A 
word to the cybernator brings forth sensuous music with strong repetitive rhythms. She shares his 
mounting excitement. 
Competing with Oneself
Scott and Hella still feel exuberantly energetic even after the underwater trip. They decide to play a game 
that was adapted from ping-pong of the previous century. The net, the table, the ball, and the paddles are 
almost unchanged. Their adversary, however, is very different, for Scott and Hella play on the same side 
of the table as partners against a mechanical paddle directed by a computer. This computer has sensing 
devices which enable it to judge the direction and speed of every ball returned over the net. Although the 
computer is able to return every ball with 100 per cent accuracy, it does not do so. The Correlation Center 
has a record of every time Scott and Hella have played this game as a team, and it has established a 
norm for them. At this time the norm for the preceding year indicates that Scott and Hella returned 85.967 
per cent of the ping-pong balls that were directed to them with an average speed of 7.72, as measured on 
a 10 point scale. The computer plays a game against Scott and Hella that represents a skill exactly equal 
to the average of all the games that they have played during the preceding year. If Scott would want to 
play alone, a different set of records maintained by the Correlation Center would enable the computer to 
put up a game against him that would be exactly equal to his average performance. 
Scott and Hella are thus able to play as a team—against themselves as a team. If they are in good shape 

today, they will win. If they are not, they will lose. Either way they win, for no matter how the game comes 
out, they feel good. They have a lot of fun laughing and trying to figure out how to get around the 
computer. 
They enjoy competing against themselves. They would find it repulsive to compete against each other. 
Such a battle would prove nothing. It could only be damaging in some slight way. If they compete against 
their past performance, they can tell if they are improving. 
During the evening Scott reclines in the massaging contour chair in his underwater apartment. The "bay 
window" is illuminated so that occasionally he looks out to see if anything is happening on the reef. As he 
lies relaxed in his chair, he watches a screen that is angled above him where the paragraphs of a book 
flash by. Scott's usual reading pace is 22,000 words per minute, but he has slowed down to 7,000 words 
because he enjoys the languorous intermixing of the abstract thoughts of the book with the colorful 
underwater world beyond his window. Suddenly, he has an interesting idea: could a range emitter be 
designed that would repel sharks, barracuda, moray eels, and other marine animals that could endanger 
swimming? He wonders if this could be built into a lightweight belt for underwater use. He immediately 
calls Central Correlation and gives his thoughts in detail. Central Correlation then sends this information 
to men and women who are interested in this area. They will probably have a teleprojection conference 
sometime in the next week or two to discuss it. 
The Disarmament Anniversary
That evening there is a world-wide ceremony scheduled by the Correlation Center. This marks the eighty-
second anniversary of the date when the last instrument of death was destroyed. Previous cultures 
developed a long progression of tools designed to kill fellow human beings. It started with the cave man 
and his club. It ended with an ultimate weapon that could wipe out all life in an instant. 
Scott at one time visited a museum and was appalled that human science and ingenuity could have been 
applied in such self-destructive ways. He was amazed that humans could have been that hostile toward 
each other. But he realized that he should not judge other people and other civilizations, for they had 
problems of which he was only dimly aware. He knew that had he lived in previous times, he probably 
would have played a part in piloting an airplane to drop a bomb or in rushing up a hill with a gun in his 
hand to kill the defenders at the top. 
No one today wants instruments for killing. In the areas where wildlife exists, man finds no need to kill 
animals. He protects himself by using computers that communicate with animals in ways that control their 
behavior. 
How remarkable human beings are, after all, Scott thinks. People in the past could live in a threatening 
world subject to being killed at any minute at the whim of a dictator in a foreign country. And yet they still 
managed to make a life of it and come through it to develop the present civilization. Scott wonders 
whether his nerves could have withstood this type of pressure. Would he, too, have developed the 
neurotic personality, the deep insecurities, hostile aggressiveness, hollowness of ego, and the scramble 
for a feeling of worth that characterized his ancestors? He is sure he would have in previous times. 
Fortunately, these are only words to him now. It is even difficult for him to be sure that he is using them in 

a way that represents the feelings of people who used the same words in previous centuries. 
Our Only Enemy
That evening Scott and Hella find a group in front of the large submarine window at the thirty-foot level. 
They have reason to ponder the long road ahead of them. The Correlation Center recently released their 
figures showing the degree to which humans are currently developing their intellectual potentials. It 
pointed out that during the previous century people in the more advanced civilizations used from 2 to 5 
per cent of their mental capacity.. Recent measures showed that the people of Scott and Hella's world are 
using 18 per cent of their intellectual, artistic, and sensory capacity. No one knows at this time whether a 
higher percentage would result in more or less happiness. Further research is needed. 
One of the older men in the group remarks that it is comforting to know that all things in their civilization 
are related to the needs and feelings of individual men and women. The method of science is used to 
measure the reactions of people. It is never used to force individuals to conform to any given, 
predetermined goals. Every program of improvement is carefully tested before it is adopted. Even after 
adoption it is still on probation forever. For nothing would be permitted to remain in succeeding centuries 
that would not contribute maximally to the happiness of the individuals who will be alive then. Man is the 
measure of all things, and the scientific method is the measurer. 
"At last," comments Hella, "we have a civilization where the entire range of human needs can be met. For 
the first time in man's long history we can have complete diversity. It's remarkable what happens when 
you let people be themselves and do what they want." 
"We certainly are fortunate," says Scott, "that we can live in so many dimensions. Our ancestors felt 
proud if they were experts in one or two things. My great-grandfather was a nuclear physicist who 
developed mathematical games as a hobby. He was considered quite brilliant because of his 
achievements in these two areas. The average person today enjoys operating in over 100 different 
areas." 
"So many new fields are opening up. There is just not enough time."
"Time is our only real enemy," replies Scott with a frown. "Perhaps we'll lick it some day." 
10. Designing the New Generation 
After seven months in the Exumas, Scott receives a message from the Correlation Center that there is an 
opportunity at a medical laboratory in Calcutta, India. This laboratory specializes in designing and training 
the new generation—probably the most important function of the new society. Hella shares Scott's 
excitement at this chance to participate. 

The query from the Correlation Center—affectionately called Corcen—is completely optional. Corcen 
never tells people they have to do anything. It simply presents information on opportunities that are 
available or situations that need attention. Each individual makes his own decision regarding what he 
wants to do. One might draw a rough analogy with an invitation to join an athletic team of the previous 
century. An invitation to be on the football team was regarded as an opportunity. The coaches didn't force 
players to join the team. 
"In ancient Greece the Athenians were fond of saying that although other states might know how to make 
better products, only Athens knew how to make human beings," Hella says seriously. "All any social 
system really makes, well or ill, is human beings. It will stand or fall on this." 
Hella prefers to remain in the Exumas longer, and she decides not to accompany Scott to India. By three 
dimensional color teleprojection, they can still "be together" as often and as long as they want. Since 
there is plenty of time, Scott asks his cybernator to arrange for a thirty-foot sailboat for cruising to Miami. 
He suggests that several companions would be desirable. Within two days Scott, another man, and two 
women leave the Exuma Islands in the sailboat. This boat has been designed to be non-cybernated. 
Scott and his companions have the novel feeling of being in an environment in which the routine flow of 
activities is not automatically structured. They find it quaint to open cans to get food, to navigate with a 
chart and compass, to fish with a hook and line, and even to pump the old-fashioned heads in the boat. A 
few days of this rather primitive living are delightful. It reminds Scott of what some people said of New 
York in the last century—"It's a nice place to visit, but I wouldn't want to live there," These experiences 
give them a broader understanding of how the lives of their ancestors were consumed so largely by the 
mechanics of living that they often had little time for intellectual, aesthetic, or sensual development. 
"I suppose if I spent most of my waking life coping with these mechanics of living," Scott confides to one 
of the women, "I'd probably be too busy for much else." 
The only part of this sailboat that is different from its counterparts of a century ago is an automatic 
communicator that has been built into the forepeak of the boat. Scott and his companions are only dimly 
aware of its presence. It sends out a radio signal every ten seconds. This is picked up by an orbiting 
satellite and relayed to Corcen. No human keeps a record of their location— only Corcen. If the signal 
from the boat were ever to stop, an immediate attempt would be made to contact Scott through a built-in 
alarm. If this were to fail, some craft flying over the area with vertical capacity would be alerted by Corcen 
to give immediate assistance to the sailboat. All of this could be automatically programmed by Corcen. In 
a simple rescue situation, the only humans that would know about it would be those aboard the rescuing 
craft and those being rescued. 
Lazily pushed by the prevailing southeast breezes, Scott's sail-boat makes its way over the White Bank 
south of Nassau. As they arrive at the Tongue of the Ocean where the depth goes from about 15 feet to 
over 5,000 feet within a short distance, Scott thinks of requesting Corcen to furnish him with information 
on the research that has been conducted there. Then he remembers that there is no teleprojection screen 
aboard his small craft. In a way he is glad. It is nice to rely only on his own senses and his own 
experiences, to see the deep blue water, to observe keenly the panorama of shifting clouds against the 
pale blue sky, to see without words, to feel in silence. They anchor several days north of Andros Island to 
absorb this more fully. Swimming, fishing, nude sun bathing—their days have a different fullness. They 
have no contact with the outside world, and there are few other boats or humans to be seen. 

After a few days they haul the anchor and head west across the Great Bahama Bank. This large 
underwater desert is seldom more than ten feet deep. The water is crystal clear. Although there are few 
fish, the surprise and delight of watching the countless starfish add additional threads to their rich 
tapestry of experience. Soon they pass the jagged rocks of Gun Key and head west across the Gulf 
Stream. Their southeast breeze holds firm, and ten hours later, tanned and exhilarated, they arrive in 
Miami. 
On his way to the South Florida terminal, Scott notices someone -waving for help in a park near the 
road. He instructs the car to pull over to the side. He notifies Corcen of his location and that he is going 
to the rescue. The person waving for assistance takes him to a man whose leg has been crushed by a 
large fallen branch. They are unable to budge it. Scott runs back to his car and tells Corcen. Corcen 
immediately gives this emergency information to several people in the vicinity. Within minutes six people 
lift the branch and release the injured man. They carefully carry him to a car which speeds him to the 
nearest cybernated hospital. 
This instant helpfulness is an important ingredient in the new society. In former times people often felt, it's 
someone else's job, I don't even know him, he might sue me, why get involved.'' Such reactions may have 
been appropriate in competitive, legalistic, money-motivated societies. In the twenty-first century people 
welcome the opportunity to assist others. Is there a more human way to spend time? Everyone is more 
secure when he feels that everyone else in the world genuinely welcomes the opportunity to be of 
assistance. Normally, people need so little help in this cybernated world of abundance that this open-
hearted feeling towards others never results in one's being overburdened. This generous willingness to 
pitch in and help extends beyond simple emergency situations. Each person identifies with the whole of 
society. If someone notices that some equipment needs repairs, he does what he can to fix it or reports it 
to Corcen. People treat all objects with the care and consideration that individuals previously gave only 
their own possessions. These individuals who have "everything" are able to give generously of 
themselves. Only in this century have all men and women so fully identified themselves with everyone 
and everything in the world. 
The Great Circle Express 
The simplest way to get to India is to board one of the around-the-world express crafts that has been 
continuously circling the globe without landing for many decades. They travel at a steady speed of 5000 
miles per hour. When this craft is approximately one thousand miles away, Scott takes off in a shuttle craft 
that accelerates to 5,000 miles per hour. When the nuclear-powered, circumnavigating craft is above 
South Florida, Scott's airship locks onto the larger craft just long enough for Scott and other passengers 
to get aboard. Departing passengers enter the shuttle craft, which then disengages and returns to the 
South Florida terminal a few minutes later. 
The flight to India takes a little over two hours. From his vantage point high in the sky, Scott enjoys the 
planned geometry of the world below—the vast waterways that have eliminated forever the tragedy of 
floods, the cybernated farm belts with their thin gleaming tracks, the dynamic cities that are focal points of 
a technology harnessed to serve all of mankind. As Scott watches the cities of India, he is impressed by 

how often the circular plan has been used. He sees a multi-story apartment ring about a mile in diameter 
under construction. Cybernated building machinery is fabricating 5,000 apartments a day with a 
construction staff of only thirty-five people. 
The cities of the previous century have been leveled except for several that have been kept for 
anthropologists and historians. These museum cities are protected by a large, transparent, geodesic 
dome and are air conditioned. Similar protection is given selected ruins of previous cultures. 
As Scott nears Calcutta, the shuttle craft ahead streaks upward for its rendezvous. It locks onto the larger 
space vehicle over Calcutta where a brief exchange of passengers takes place. Scott boards the smaller 
craft and within minutes alights at the Calcutta airport. There are no porters, for passengers have no 
baggage. There are no customs agents since international divisions have been meaningless for many 
decades. Scott confers with a local cybernator about apartment availabilities while he waits for his 
cybernated auto. 
In Calcutta, Scott chooses an apartment with nine other men and women companions. He could have a 
private apartment but he is in the mood for group living. He gives instructions to the cybernator in the 
apartment to pick up his system of preferences from Corcen. Thus, within the limits of the preferences of 
his companions in the apartment, Scott will continue to feel perfectly at home. 
Circular Cities 
Many of the colorful cities in the twenty-first century are laid out in the circular pattern Scott observed 
from the air. The central hub of the city has a nuclear generator that produces all of the power needed to 
operate the millions of invisible electronic servants that silently free the people to live fulfilling, creative 
lives. The central core of each city also contains a master computer that cybernetically watches over the 
city as a whole. It is connected to every room in the entire city and also Corcen. This master cybernator, 
operating as the city hall of former times, works automatically and normally has no humans in 
attendance. 
The research laboratories are located in the first ring of buildings that encircle the power and computer 
core. Hospital facilities adjoin the medical research area. These modern hospitals give medical care or 
nursing care to a population of 1,000,000 people with a staff of only 10, who contribute their services from 
time to time because of their interest in this work. There is, of course, much less illness in the new world 
than in previous centuries, and there are practically no accidents. Disasters and accidents were almost 
eliminated by an attitude toward engineering that minimized economy and maximized safety. All 
diagnostic techniques, laboratories, surgery, behavioral assistance, and nursing procedures are 
cybernated. The small staff performs no routine duties in the cybernated hospital. They are only there to 
help in the rare event of a problem. 
The second ring from the core contains multi-story apartments. They are over a quarter-mile from the 
research ring. Recreational facilities and circular parks surround the apartments on both sides of the ring. 
When Scott goes from his apartment to any part of the city, he asks the cybernator to summon an auto. 

As Scott approaches the vehicle, the door automatically opens and the seat swings out. Scott verbally 
gives his destination and reclines on the contour chair. He is then free to read, to think, or simply to relax. 
Within minutes the auto chauffeurs him to wherever he wishes to go in the city. All vehicles have 
proximity mechanisms for the prevention of what were formerly called "accidents" but are now considered 
technical negligence in planning the transportation system. 
These autos are available throughout the entire city for the use of everyone. When Scott gets out at the 
research laboratory, the auto is directed by the city's cybernator to the next point at which it will probably 
be needed. 
Scott always enjoys the warm feelings of teamwork and cooperation that are experienced by people 
working together on common problems. There is an esprit de corps—a feeling of man against the 
unknown; a feeling of contributing significantly to the present and future happiness of all mankind. People 
in the twenty-first century are eager to accept opportunities for participation and research. They are never 
paid for this activity as had been common in previous centuries. How could they be paid? They already 
have every material resource of the twenty-first-century civilization available for their use. They are not 
even "paid" by prestige or status. 
Almost everyone at one time or another plays a part on various research teams. If someone doesn't, it 
really doesn't matter. The only reward lies not on the outside, but on the inside. It comes from the 
pleasure that one gets from exercising his mind, from growth and improvement, from the pleasures of 
understanding, and, from the contented feeling of saying, "Well, we certainly solved that one." 
The Genetics Laboratory 
The laboratory to which Scott is assigned specializes in the manipulation of the DNA and RNA structures 
of human genes. The people of the twenty-first century have worked out techniques for varying the 
structure of the human body. By using a computer to change various sets among the five billion 
specifications carried by DNA and RNA molecules, almost any change may be made in a human body. 
Their major concern at this point lies not, for example, in how to equip a human being with two hearts 
instead of the usual one, but in whether such an arrangement will add to human happiness. 
"All changes made in the structure and function of human beings are first thoroughly tested in research 
labs," Scott is informed. "Then experimental and control groups are set up to get valid comparisons. No 
improvements are considered desirable in their own right. No guessing is permitted. It has been found 
that something that can seem like a great idea might turn out in practice to be nothing of the sort. All 
ideas for the genetic improvement of human beings are thoroughly tried out, usually over a period of 
decades, before they are generally adopted for programming into the new generation. The door is always 
left open. 'Blueprints' for genes are always stored in case future generations evaluate differently and wish 
to eliminate any changes made." 
Scott is quickly brought up to date on research in progress. Trial runs involving 500 people are now being 
made with brain structures containing twenty billion neurons—double the usual number. Other projects in 
progress are designing eyes that can shift from regular vision to telescopic and microscopic vision and 

altering the liver to change the composition of the blood in a way that seems to add 36 per cent to the 
human life span. 
They are experimenting with an improved hormone balance for women that eliminates the monthly cycle 
of moodiness— menstruation was eliminated previously by designing a uterus with a stable lining. Men 
have also benefited from the improved techniques of genetic manipulation. A greater climax frequency 
now enables them to perform at the high level usually desired by twenty-first century women. 
Scott knows that in previous times there were five races of mankind. Since individuality and diversity are 
prized in the twenty-first century, these genetics laboratories have produced eight more races. Corcen is 
seeking data to determine whether additional races should be designed to add even more variety to the 
lives of future men and women. 
Suppose a part of the body should wear out or get injured. How could we get a duplicate organ? Each cell 
in the body contains a blueprint for growing a replacement part. Research is in progress to use a cell from 
the body of an injured person to grow an identical part in-vitro that a cybernated surgical mechanism 
could install. 
One of the most exciting new developments is a built-in receptor that makes it possible to connect one's 
brain directly with Corcen or any other input source. If invited, you can tune into another person's brain 
and share his thoughts and feelings without the distorting effects of words. When this is perfected, any 
sensations can be experienced through direct neuronal input. 
Other researchers are developing a lifetime implanted communication unit that would permit two-way 
thought messages. By thought, one could request from Corcen a bit of information, and it would be 
available immediately. Such thought communication with others would, when perfected, offer an 
electronic realization of what used to be called "mental telepathy." 
Breakthroughs are being made in controlling the factors that permit cells to age. Aging is considered a 
disease by these men and women. They are confident that when it is fully understood, it can be 
eliminated. A "youth serum" that includes thyroxine and a mixture of hormones has doubled the years of 
vitality and has added an average of 89 per cent to the life span in a test on laboratory animals. 
"Humility when facing the unknown is our dominant theme," one of the older men says to Scott. "We are 
producing things that by the standards of previous centuries would have been regarded as fantastic 
miracles. Yet, no matter how successfully our experiment turns out, we always leave the door open for 
improving the results. We never believe we have the best way. We always have the feeling, 'It seems to 
be working well now, but it hasn't stood the test of centuries or millenia. Let's go slowly and not close any 
doors behind us.' " 
Brain Boosters 
John F. Kennedy said in the past century, "The human mind is our fundamental resource. . . ." Scott 
knows that the greatest achievement of these genetic laboratories during the past half-century was the 
implantation of a finger-sized organic computer in the growing embryonic brain. Everyone in the new 

society that is under fifty years old has this new development. Since Scott is only 45, he has the benefit of 
this breakthrough in designing human beings. By manipulation of the DNA and RNA molecules, a small 
auxiliary brain was developed that is nurtured in-vitro outside of the human body. 
When the cortical cells of this supplementary brain complete their proliferation, they are electronically 
connected with Corcen. These brains are then imprinted with the basic attitudes and skills needed for 
orientation in the twenty-first century. Scott watches as the cybernated facilities program the small but 
potent brain boosters. To the three R's of previous times—reading, 'riting, and 'rithmetic—an additional 
seven R's, as outlined by Dr. William A. McCall in the twentieth century, are included: 
RESEARCH
The application of the scientific method as a way of life that enables man to test ideas to determine their 
reliability. 
REASONING
The desire and ability to manipulate ideas in a creative and logical way. Adjusting constructively to new 
situations and making effective choices. 
RELATIONSHIPS
Attitudes and skills that enable a person to interact and communicate with others in ways that bring 
maximum mutual satisfactions. 
REPORTING
The use of all senses in ways that produce the richest and most accurate input to the brain and output to 
others. 
RECREATION
The attitudes and skills which permit the use of one's time to achieve a multi-dimensional life. 
REVITALIZATION
Diet, health, and safety skills that add years to life, and life to years. 
RESPONSIBILITY
The feeling of playing an important part on the human team in the game of life. The ability to find 
satisfaction in assisting and participating—but always within the limits one can give without resentment. 
As suggested by McCall, each of these R's is two-phased—an attitude phase and a skill phase. It is not 
enough that the young be provided with the skills of reasoning. It is equally important that they find 
pleasure in reasoning. It is not enough that the young know how to read. They need to enjoy reading. 
Scott often uses his supplemental brain as a simple computer. 
He can multiply, divide, add. or subtract any six digit number in a period of ten seconds. A complete 
vocabulary and understanding of the grammatical structure of the universal language is also imprinted. 

In addition to being provided with an array of the basic tools and skills needed for orientation, this 
supplementary brain is also imprinted with information equivalent to a Ph.D. level in twelve different areas 
of learning. These areas are selected at random by Corcen in such a way that few individuals have the 
same pattern of intellectual development. Corcen also selects one area of learning and imprints this 
supplementary brain with every bit of information in this area that has been accumulated in the extensive 
memory banks. 
For instance, if a supplementary brain is chosen to receive "complete" information in the field of 
anthropology, it is imprinted with a word-by-word reproduction of every worthwhile article ever published 
in that field that has been recorded in the memory banks of Corcen. It is imprinted with every book, every 
recorded lecture by eminent people in the field of anthropology, extensive simulated field experience, 
plus a briefing of all work now in progress. This is an internal treasure of knowledge that the individual 
can never live long enough to exhaust completely. But it will always be there in his brain, available for 
use to the extent that the individual can use it. 
After these supplementary brains are matured and fully imprinted with this enormous assortment of 
attitudes and skills and their subordinate informations, they are attached to a growing embryo at a time of 
rapid proliferation of the ectoderm. When the ectoderm begins this stage, the supplementary brain is 
rapidly absorbed and integrated into the human nervous system. Since this implantation cannot be 
performed satisfactorily in an embryo inside the body of a woman, babies are grown from DNA 
engineered germ plasm in the cybernated "uterine" containers. 
The sperm and egg cell used by the human race in the long evolutionary past are no longer needed. 
Reproductive cells are produced in the laboratory that are designed to develop into vastly improved 
versions of Homo sapiens. These cells are engineered by Corcen and can be programmed to develop 
into male or female embryos. At the age of approximately nine months, the developed infant is removed 
to continue its growth in the cybernated nurseries. 
A woman of the twenty-first century does not want an infant to emerge from her vagina any more than a 
man in previous times would have desired a baby to grow in his body. Just as no man or woman in the 
twentieth century would knowingly have brought into the world an imbecile baby, it would be equally 
abhorrent for any twenty-first-century man or woman to bring into the world a baby that is not equipped 
with this supplementary brain. Such a person, even though possessed with an I.Q. equal to Einstein's, 
would feel like a moron relative to his companions. 
Scott is aware that the implantation of this brain booster does not automatically produce an infant who can 
solve problems in calculus. The resource is there—available but untapped—just as the capacity of young 
Mozart existed at birth even though his infant fingers had never touched the keys of a piano. Only 
maturation can provide the experience and motivation that enables these young infants of the twenty-first 
century to make use of their great heritage. 
The Child Is His Best Teacher 

No attempt is made to teach these children anything. There are no schools or teachers. Their teacher is 
the multi-dimensional environment that is designed to interest, stimulate, and challenge. The basic 
information they need has been implanted in their supplementary brains. It has been found that any 
attempt to teach them only retards the learning process. Experiments have shown that the best way is to 
let these children explore their environment. If you want a child to learn to work a device, you put it near 
him. He does the rest. His natural curiosity leads him to observe the operation of the teleprojection 
screen, and he begins to request Corcen to furnish him with programs. These cover the entire range of 
knowledge and entertainment. However, obscene material used on TV and movies in the previous 
century, showing brutality, murder, and sadism, are not available in the nursery. 
When a child observes things that correlate with information programmed into his supplementary brain, a 
flash of insight comes. He is literally on fire intellectually. His thoughts race into the exciting new areas of 
thinking and feeling that he is discovering inside himself. He learns that the spirit of creative inquiry is one 
of the most delightful things that he can experience. A great feeling of dignity and worth is achieved as 
the child explores his own inner resources and integrates them into his expanding world of people and 
things! 
Children are not informed about the areas in which their brains have been pre-programmed. They 
discover these for themselves. The greatest thrill comes when they discover the one area in which they 
have total information. No other human knows the pre-programming of their supplementary brains. These 
patterns have been set up by Corcen to add spice and adventure to life. "Scientific research has 
established that the curiosity of a human child is many times the amount needed for his intellectual 
development if environmental conditions are stimulating and there are no teachers to interfere," Scott's 
associate tells him. "Everyone who associates with growing children is instructed to avoid telling them 
what they should or shouldn't do. Back in the twentieth century, education was sometimes considered a 
process of helping a child fit into society. Now we know that fitting into society may be taken for granted, 
for we have found that children raised without hostility and scarcity develop social skills that enable them 
to achieve the finest possible relations with other people. 
"Those who associate with children think only of understanding the feelings and interests of the child. 
They ask the children questions and practically never give them answers. The children have to find their 
own answers—perhaps from the limitless facilities of Corcen. This makes life more exciting and never 
blighting. 
They develop a feeling of intellectual adventure. The child develops with personal authenticity." 
The Creative Adventure of Educational Research 
The men and women who enjoy the challenge of improving the next generation have developed 
thousands of new ways to meet the needs of infants and children. Nothing is taken for granted. Little is 
copied from the past. The people who are working in this area of the new civilization do not feel they have 
any final answers. They know that they are getting results. They are confident that their methods are 
superior to any ways of rearing children that have ever been used before in the history of the world. They 

know that by observing carefully and thinking creatively and by continually measuring the results, they will 
find more effective ways of doing things. Whatever "errors" they are now making will eventually be 
corrected. 
Through sensitive, scientific research an effective environment for each age level has been evolved. 
Constant research is in progress to find out just what is happening and how it can be improved. It has 
been found that an environment that gives optimal enjoyment and development at six months retards at 
one year. The surroundings that are best for a one year old will hold back a two year old, and so forth. 
Great care is taken to provide an environment that is scaled to meet the needs of each individual age 
level. 
"The nurseries are designed so that the child never needs correction, for it can do nothing undesirable in 
this environment," Scott is told. "In the twentieth century a toddler of two years old could hardly do 
anything right. Every time it turned around it had to be admonished, 'No! Don't go out in the street, you'll 
be killed. Don't reach up to the top of the dresser because you might upset Mommy's bottle of perfume. 
Don't pull the tail of the dog, or he might bite you,' and so forth. Such constant bombardment of a young 
child makes him a lifelong slave to external patterns." 
The Cybernated Nurseries 
Scott sees that the nurseries of young children in the twenty-first century are scaled down in size so that 
children have no feeling of being small and inferior. All natural functions, such as eating, eliminating, 
playing, sleeping, and so forth, can be done in any way that the child chooses in the cybernated nursery. 
Living areas are engineered in such a way that children can not hurt each other prior to the time that they 
develop their feeling of empathy for all living things. These babies grow up in an atmosphere free from 
hostility, criticism, deprivation, scarcity, and jealousy. They are thus able to develop positive feelings of 
co-operation and comradeship for all other human beings that were impossible for individuals who lived in 
previous centuries. 
Food is eaten when desired. There is no pattern of breakfast, lunch, and dinner, such as was common in 
previous centuries. This three-times-a-day eating habit was probably designed for the convenience of 
cooks more than the needs of individuals. Scientific research has shown that the human body operates 
best when it snacks on nutritious foods at frequent intervals. The eating of three large meals results in 
biochemical reactions that are not consistent with the highest level of health. 
Scott knows that in previous centuries mealtime was often a struggle between mother and child. "Just 
taste it—you may like it. Don't hold your fork that way—it's not polite. You haven't finished your plate. 
You've dropped food all over your shirt." It was often a nuisance for a mother to feed a young child in the 
past, and she sometimes became impatient doing it. Even an infant senses feelings of impatience and 
hostility, and thus the seeds of insecurity and fear were planted in his personality. 
Up until the twenty-first century most of the ways of handling children were based on the needs of 
parents and adults. For example, when men and women experimented to find a better way to feed a 
twenty-month-old child, they found that the child enjoyed putting bite-sized nuggets in its mouth and 

sucking food from the nipple-like spouts. The children at this age level also enjoyed pressing a pad which 
would release small wafers with an accompanying musical tone. Feeding systems were set up that 
enabled the children to eat whenever they wished. The children usually were noisily exuberant, but there 
were no adults to be annoyed. And there was no mess to be cleaned up by weary, harried mothers—the 
cybernated cleaning mechanisms were on the job. Eating was always fun! 
In the past bathing young children was sometimes a nuisance and irritation to both mother and child. Men 
and women of the twenty-first century asked themselves, "How do you set up a bathing situation so that 
young children are automatically attracted to it?" They didn't want adults to have to brow-beat the 
youngsters to tell them it was time to get their bath. They wanted the bathing situation to fit in with the 
needs and interests of the child as felt by the child. They wanted the child to clean himself and get a bath 
simply because he wanted to. But how do you make an eighteen-month-old child want to take a bath? 
They found that they had to make bathing pleasant. After many experiments they discovered that a six-
inch pool of warm swirling water with random shower sprays that give a nice feeling on the skin is most 
effective. 
Scott laughs as he watches the children enjoying the cybernated bath. A screen in the bottom of the pool 
automatically comes up if a child's head goes under water. When the child gets tired of playing in the 
water, he can either dry naturally in the warm air or lie down on a rocking towel couch that rolls him over 
and over. Sometimes children lie in these rocking towel couches just because they enjoy them—whether 
they need drying or not. 
Toilet training is also simplified to make it pleasant for the child and free of menial activity for adults. A 
young toddler can urinate and defecate at any time or place in his specially designed environment. The 
cybernators watching over the children immediately sense wetness and an automatic, roving, cleaning 
mechanism cleans up the floor and child. Since no fuss or guilt arises over toilet training, the children 
learn to use the toilet mechanisms at an earlier age than in the past. 
"An amazing discovery has been made in these cybernated nurseries," Scott's associate tells him with 
great enthusiasm. "The inferiority complex, which psychologists and psychiatrists had regarded as a 
basic part of human personality, does not develop! We don't destroy their feeling of worth during their 
defenseless childhood. This may be the first era in human history that has produced confident, secure 
humans with no impediments to achieving the greatest joy of living." 
Learning By Self-Directed Living 
Scott observes the series of environments that enable the infants and children to develop to the fullest in 
every way. It has been found that a graded series of twelve environments is needed to develop the 
newborn to the age of five. After the two-year level is reached, the child decides for himself when to go to 
the next environment. It is not considered "bright" for a child to push himself to an advanced environment 
as long as he is comfortable and interested in the current environment. 
The advanced environments for the older children have equipment and facilities that would have been 

unavailable even at university levels in the previous century. Teaching machines have been designed to 
attract and hold the interest of the children. Three-dimensional teleprojections of every kind are available 
through Corcen at any time of night or day. All activity is self-motivated. There are no classes, no 
teachers, and no tests. The educational researchers are constantly amazed at the intelligent self-direction 
of these young children. They learn more rapidly when left alone in their specially designed environments 
than any previous children who were put in large boxes called schoolrooms, complete with Miss Brooks to 
spoon feed information and then force them to regurgitate it at examination time. 
These children are never subjected to criticism, for it has been found that criticism represses and reduces 
their potential. They are surrounded by constructive examples in place of criticism. Their egos do not 
need the amount of praise that was so effective in teaching in the past. Each is free to meet life on his 
own terms and to learn to express his emerging uniqueness. Perhaps no previous society could let 
children develop so fully as individuals and at the same time provide them with a cultural heritage of such 
enormous richness. 
There are few adults in the cybernated environments of the children. The adults who are there have 
chosen to spend time with children for one reason only—they enjoy it. They never act as disciplinarians 
since the cybernated environments are so designed that no child can hurt himself or others. A relaxed 
companionship of a quality that never existed before between parents and children develops between 
these adults and the children. 
The Greatest Research Program 
"Previous centuries were eras of scarcity," Scott's associate reasons, "and this scarcity was not only in 
material goods. Few children in the past felt enough love, warmth, security, feeling of worth, and freedom 
to develop in their own way. They were stifled by criticism, comparison, and censure. Only in the twenty-
first century has the creative intelligence of man solved these problems. At last, little children appear to 
have their needs met. But each decade shows that further improvement is possible. 
"One of the most continuous needs of a child is that of a feeling of security, of human closeness, and of 
rapport with a friendly world." Scott watches a group of young infants in their cybernated cribs as his 
companion leads him through the nursery. "The most intensive research program in human history was 
launched to give effective solutions to the enormous problems in designing cybernated environments for 
young children that were superior in all respects to the traditional family and home. How can a soothing 
cybernated voice establish rapport with an infant? How can a three-dimensional, teletactile arm that is felt 
by an infant in his crib be activated to give even more security and feeling of constancy than a mother's 
arm of the previous century? How can cybernated mechanisms be designed to give children more 
warmth and more of everything they need than even a superior mother could give in previous times? 
How can machines form the link between words and things so that language habits are created? What 
types of situations do these twenty-first-century infants and children need to develop a tolerance for 
frustration—to develop patience and calmness when things do not go as expected? To what extent can 
the older children be relied on to act as models for younger ones? To what extent are adult models 
needed in the environment of infants and children at various ages? What is the best way to give a child 
experience with the adult environment so that he can acquire an independence and feel at home in the 
world? Bit by bit, research yields answers to these and countless other problems. 

"No twentieth-century answers to these questions are applicable in our world. Overall conditions have 
changed too much to use the old 'wisdom.' For the first time in the history of man, creative, scientific 
intelligence is applied to the problems of giving children the maximum of everything they need to develop 
satisfying, purposeful lives. It took decades to arrive at the preliminary patterns of the cybernated nursery. 
But perhaps even greater change awaits us in the future, for the nurturing of the young is the foundation 
of every civilization." 
An Age of Individuality
 
On the wall in the conference room, a large portrait appears. Below the frame Scott reads the words of 
the scientist that founded this laboratory in 2014: 
Our society is patterned for individuals. All social structures and physical arrangements are 
designed to meet the needs of individuals and accommodate almost any diversity. We do not feel 
that children should do anything other than what they select themselves. "Life, Liberty, and the  
Pursuit of Happiness" applies equally to children. 
The tour of the cybernated nurseries is almost over. Scott is impressed by the changes that have 
occurred in the nurseries since he was a child. "Learning is a lifetime process that starts at the time the 
supplementary brain is implanted in the growing nervous system of the embryo," his co-worker points out. 
"Education is only stopped by death. There is no graduation or diploma that artificially chops up the 
learning process. 
"The only thing comparable to graduation usually occurs when a child is about five years old. When the 
child's interaction with Corcen shows that he can safely be permitted to leave the nursery area, he is 
welcomed as a full member of society. He is then entitled to his own apartment. He begins to make his 
own choices of what he wants to do and where he wants to live." 
"Youngsters are amazing," agrees Scott. "There are eight-year-old girls that travel to the moon and live 
there several years. I knew a seven-year-old boy who was invited to join the crew of a space ship." 
"Children, however," Scott's associate continues, "are not motivated to develop into adult roles at any 
particular age. When it happens, it happens. No one is watching them. No one measures them. No one 
compares them. No one is worried if they lag. No one pushes them to "get ahead." Each individual feels 
completely free of all pressures to do anything." He flashes a knowing smile, "And, you see, this makes 
them want to do everything!" 
11.A Visit to Corcen 
While Scott is in India, Hella remains at the underwater apartment in the Exumas. There is so much to 
explore, both inside her brain and outside. Her supplementary brain has been programmed by Corcen 
with a Ph.D. level of information on oceanography and marine science. Her life has been so busy in other 
areas that she has never used this information except in a peripheral way. She is swept up in the 

fascinating correlation between the facts and theories that were quietly stored in her brain and the marine 
world around her. She asks Corcen to send her data to bring her up to date. By using her own inner 
resources and through discussions with others who have backgrounds in depth in this area, Hella spends 
the better part of a year in one of the keenest of human pleasures—the intellectual experience of 
integrating the world outside the brain with the information and knowledge inside. By color teleprojection, 
Scott and Hella mutually share their experiences and feelings—often hourly when something exciting is 
happening. 
It has been many decades since Hella has visited Corcen and the North American Cybernated Industrial 
Complex. When she was five years old, she visited these centers that play a primary role in providing a 
good life. She knows that returning now would give her a heightened perception and a depth of meaning 
that was not available to her as a young child. For a number of years, she has been thinking how 
worthwhile it would be to visit Corcen, but other activities have always clamored louder for her attention. 
Now a group of men and women who have been enjoying the city in the sea is headed in this direction, 
and Hella decides to go with them. 
One of the nicest things about living in the twenty-first century is the enormous range of choices. It is far 
greater than any other civilization was able to offer its citizens. Although Hella and her friends are in a 
relatively isolated area, they have the choice of a sailboat such as Scott used or an automatically 
powered seacraft. They could call for a variety of aircraft, depending upon their needs and how far they 
want to go. They could board a submarine freighter that services island communities, or they could use 
the GEM (Ground Effect Machine). 
Since they want to spend a day roaming through the islands of the Bahamas, they choose the GEM. It 
can travel above a more or less flat surface at speeds up to 200 miles-per-hour. This machine skims at a 
height of about four feet above any surface. Whether water or land, a paved road or a rough field—it 
doesn't matter. It is supported in the air by three circular jets of air directed downward toward the ground. 
With relatively little energy this "ground effect" is able to lift a heavy craft in the air just far enough for the 
air to escape around the edges of the three ring vortices. As long ago as 1950, the British developed a 
GEM that skimmed the English Channel between Britain and France. 
For a day Hella and her friends use the GEM to cruise around the Bahama Islands. The clear water and 
colorful coral banks are still engaging. They skim by Eleuthera, Abaco, Nassau, An-dros, the Berry 
Islands, and, finally, Bimini at sunset. Then off they go across the Gulf Stream to Miami. 
Hella and her friends leave the GEM at the South Florida terminal the next morning and board the linear-
acceleration train that will take them to Corcen in the Rocky Mountain area of the United States. Within 
the gleaming metal walls of these enormous trains, attractive living areas permit a continuation of the 
living patterns of one's home. This train travels in a large tube with a partial vacuum. It has no engine and 
no wheels. It is electrodynamically supported above a V-shaped rail that electromagnetically propels each 
car of the train. The negative charge on the probe projecting from the front repels moisture and dust 
particles in the tube ahead. This diminishes resistance and allows the train to develop a 2,000 mile-per-
hour speed. Yet, even when accelerating or stopping, it feels as steady as a concrete building. 
As Hella's train speeds through Florida, it passes through a cybernated farm over 200 miles long and 50 

miles wide. Tracks 100 feet wide run the entire length of the farm. Large cybernated mechanisms slowly 
travel up and down these tracks to prepare the land for planting, to place seeds, fertilize, and water them. 
On a return trip several days later, these plants will be watered and cultivated, if needed. At the right time 
the vegetables will be picked, quick-frozen, and packaged by the enormous farming machines. Weather 
control eliminates all losses from freezing, drought, or floods. The cybernated Florida farm complex 
supplying food for one-fourth of a continent does not need a single human in attendance. Corcen co-
ordinates the actual operation through a local cybernator programmed for scientific farming. The one-hour 
journey passes rapidly as Hella and her friends enjoy a wide range of cybernated entertainment. 
The World Correlation Center 
Corcen is housed 2,000 feet below the top of a large mountain to give it protection from any meteorite that 
might survive the fall into the earth's atmosphere. Many thousands of years ago a large meteorite plowed 
into Arizona and left a crater 3,870 feet wide by 560 feet deep. Radar stations throughout the globe 
constantly scan space for large meteors. On the rare occasion when a dangerous meteor is detected, 
missiles are sent out to pulverize it while it is still thousands of miles from earth. 
Hella, standing at the entrance to the mountain, surveys the countryside below. She thinks briefly of 
today's missile technology and is glad it is used to protect mankind from remote dangers instead of 
threatening and killing. 
A combination of high-speed elevators and escalator-type sidewalks convey Hella and her friends to the 
underground Corcen complex. Hella enters a large room where a six-foot sphere is electrodynamically 
suspended ten feet above the floor. Hella looks at this sphere with a feeling of awe and appreciation. 
This is Corcen—the master computer that correlates the interactions of all people and all automated 
machines throughout the entire world. 
In the time it takes her to draw one breath, this remarkable servant of man has probably made ten billion 
decisions based on the scanning of trillions of bits of information. If everyone on earth were superbly 
organized into a tremendous bureaucratic complex, it would be impossible to do in a year what this 
computer can perform in a second. Corcen does a zillion times more for each individual than any 
government of the past could possibly have done. 
A teleprojection of a human guide now speaks to the visitors to Corcen. "This computer that we call 
'Corcen' is our servant, not our master although it is a servant whose abilities far exceed ours. Its only 
purpose is to free us of routine problems and permit us to live in our own way. It responds quickly to 
criticisms and suggestions from all individuals, checking them out and seeing what can be done about 
them. No elected politician of previous times responded as consistently and effectively to the needs of his 
voters. Corcen never tells us how we should run our lives. It simply specifies that if we want certain 
results, we should go about getting them in certain ways."
"If anyone doubts who is in supreme command in this man-machine complex, let him consider this: the 
master power switch that could inactivate Corcen is on the wall over there. We would also have to shut 

down the emergency duplicate of Corcen that is maintained in Europe. If these switches were thrown 
without planning, it would result in utter chaos. With careful planning it would be possible to inactivate 
Corcen and fragment the world once again. We could chop up the world into as many pieces as we 
wanted and operate each one independently. Confusion and a return to the primitive society of our 
ancestors would be the unhappy result. If we asked Corcen to plan its own elimination for us, it would 
probably be done in a way that would minimize the disadvantages. But it would be like killing what makes 
us truly human, truly free, truly happy." 
"How completely we trust ourselves and each other," thinks Hella, looking at the master switch that 
activates Corcen. "No one will ever touch it, but it's nice to know it's there." 
Ultimate Predictability 
The teleprojected figure walks to a large table. The group follows him. A loudspeaker above the table 
begins, "The fundamental principle upon which Corcen operates is that decisions with a high degree of 
predictability can be made when adequate facts are available. We would like to give you a demonstration 
of this. Before you is a table twenty-four feet in diameter. Above the table you will see a small container 
that has fifty steel balls that are exactly twelve millimeters in diameter. These balls will now be mixed. 
The transparent container holding the fifty balls turns upside down so that all balls jostled around to a 
new position. 
"You will notice that there are electronic sensors in twelve positions surrounding these balls," the 
loudspeaker continues. "These sensors in a millionth of a second have already determined the location 
of each of these balls. This data will now be fed into Corcen (here Hella looks up at the six-foot sphere, 
only fifty feet away, and less than a second later Corcen will predict the eventual landing place of each 
of these balls when dropped onto the table three feet below." 
The group looks at the table and notices that there are a number of white dots that have appeared on the 
dark surface. The speaker continues to describe what everyone has now guessed. "When these balls are 
dropped, they will tumble against each other; they will hit the table; they will bounce. Some of them will hit 
other balls while rolling, but within a few seconds all of these balls will stop rolling. They will come to rest 
exactly on the fifty white dots. Let us see if Corcen has accurately predicted their behavior." 
The transparent container releases its flood of fifty balls. There is a series of metallic clanks as these fifty 
steel spheres bounce around in apparently random fashion. But within twelve seconds all but one come to 
rest. One seemingly erratic ball has bounced against the edge of the table. It hits a stopped ball that rolls 
to cover a white dot and, in so doing, deflects its own movement until, at last, the only dot remaining is 
covered. Hella takes a deep breath. Fantastic predictability! 
The speaker continues. "If we provided our best mathematician with pencil and paper, it would have 
taken him over ten years to make the computations with the same degree of accuracy that Corcen 
produced in less than a second! 
"This is the guiding principle of our Correlation Center: although we know it is impossible to predict the 
behavior of single atoms, the prediction of the average behavior of an aggregate of atoms—which we 

regard as objects in the real world—is predictable within stated limits of reliability if we have an adequate 
sampling of facts. Note that we do not have to know all of the facts—this is impossible. An adequate 
sampling of relevant facts does the job for us." 
The speaker above the table stops. The teleprojected guide again takes over. "Several centuries ago the 
affairs of mankind were far simpler." A large screen lights up. It shows a map of the world with population 
figures superimposed on each country. "Up until the eighteenth century most European nations had less 
than 25 million people. Great Britain never exceeded ten million people. The interaction of government 
with economic and social affairs was relatively simple. Most intelligent citizens who wished to be informed 
of the issues could have made fairly useful predictions. If predictions were inaccurate, the stakes were not 
high, and things tended to move slowly. They could have been corrected by the succeeding generation 
without too much harm to mankind. 
"The situation changed radically in the twentieth century. Prior to that time a war might have killed a half-
million people. The first major war of the twentieth century killed ten million people. The second major war 
killed five times as many. Had a third major war taken place, it is likely that billions of people would have 
been killed, to say nothing of the devastated cities and industrial plants. An ulcer in the stomach of a 
dictator could have played a part in a hasty emotional reaction that could have caused this catastrophe. 
Capricious, ineffective government by individuals could no longer have been tolerated. During most of the 
twentieth century, a mixture of democratic and totalitarian governments controlled the lives and destinies 
of over 100 petty, touchy, nationalistic units. No one felt secure." 
Hella closes her eyes momentarily. She is glad she didn't live in such troublesome times. 
"About the middle of the twentieth century, the electronic computer was born," the teleprojected guide 
continues. The large screen continually changes to illustrate the thought of the guide. "At first it was a 
simple instrument. Like a phonograph record, it could respond only in ways that were programmed into it.
The human brain of the twentieth century had approximately ten billion neurons. Each of the larger 
neurons in a human brain had an average of over ten thousand connections. This gave a human brain a 
potential network of connections that was greater than the total number of material particles in the 
universe. Many felt that computers could never function as well as the human brain. But by 1985, when 
computers had been built with more association capacity than a brain, it was found that they, too, could 
perform in ways that Homo sapiens had previously thought were his exclusive prerogative. Computers 
exceeded man in most realms of judgment, decision-making capacity, imagination, insight, creativity, and 
wisdom. Their performance was not clouded by ego needs, emotional conditioning, or moodiness. Their 
accumulated experiences and abilities were not cancelled by death. They were, in a sense, immortal. It 
was recognized that their decisions were far more dependable than those of any human being or group of 
human beings. For example, it has been over 108 years since a human defeated a computer in a game 
of chess." 
Hella can scarcely imagine a time when men were more intelligent than computers. In the last half 
century, whenever the judgment of a computer was different from that of a human, it was invariably found 
that the computer had the greater degree of predictability. The only way to throw Corcen off is to deny it 
the relevant facts that it needs. Even then it has a sensitive feel for the need to delay predictions until 
more facts are available. 

The cybernated guide now returns to the circular table. "Even if Corcen were not enormously superior to 
the thinking ability of a group of experts, the mere fact that it can perform in one second what takes 
humans a lifetime gives it an incredible effectiveness. Corcen operates in thin slivers of time called 
nanoseconds. A nanosecond is to a second as a second is to thirty years. In most human affairs today we 
need fast, accurate decisions. If a decision is delayed, the conditions may have changed so that even an 
adequate decision is of little use. In the demonstration you have just seen with the fifty balls, even if a 
mathematician could have predicted their eventual rolling places in ten years, by the time he could have 
worked out his predictions, the position of the balls would have shifted minutely due to earth tremors or 
other factors. Just as human legs have largely been outmoded for transportation, so human minds have 
largely been outmoded for making decisions that have high degrees of complexity. 
How Corcen Assumes Governmental Functions 
"Let's review the historical conditions that resulted in Corcen's governing the world," the teleprojected 
figure disappears and a telescreen begins. "The universities of the twentieth century turned out scientists 
who were noted for their narrow specialization. Enormous progress was made in the development of each 
science, but society in many ways failed to benefit, for these specialists were unable to see the problems 
of society as a whole, Often their terminology was so specialized that they were unable to communicate 
with scientists in other fields. It was like a group of splendid towers rising high in the air, but no one could 
get from one tower to the other. 
"Physicists failed to understand social problems. Social scientists were limited in their ability to envision 
the consequences of cybernation. Economists repeated outdated shibboleths such as "work," "wealth," 
"demand," "production," etc. They somehow felt that the purpose of life was the consumption of material 
goods and that everything must meet the test of the marketplace. Everyone was stuck in his own rut. 
"Synthesis, coordination, integration, some way to see the forest instead of the individual trees—these 
were needed. The pieces were there, but the jigsaw puzzle had to be put together. A new emphasis 
arose in scientific training. Educators began to stress that a large part of the value of a scientist lay in his 
ability to apply his knowledge broadly—to see society as a whole and not solely through his own 
particular set of binoculars. It was recognized that only a multi-valued, scientific orientation would enable 
men to participate constructively in the reconstruction of human affairs. The multi-scientist was the new 
product of the universities. 
"During the latter part of the twentieth century, social and economic matters became so complex that 
politicians in all countries began to rely more and more upon multi-scientists and their computers. The 
people of the world gradually began to view their politicians as incompetent. For, after all, as the 
Technocrats pointed out in the last century, there's no democratic way or communistic way to design an 
aircraft reactor, a sewer system, or a medical laboratory. There's only an efficient way and a less efficient 
way, a way that works well and a way that doesn't work well, a way that is reliable and a way that gives 
constant trouble. 
"As the cybernated factories of the leading industrial countries of the world began, around 1980, to pour 
out a volume of goods large enough to swing from an economy of scarcity to an economy of abundance, 

the values of the people changed. They realized that it was not necessary to compete any longer to live a 
good life. The age-old habit of the jungle, where you take from another to get for yourself, was no longer 
useful. Fighting actually ruined one's possibilities of acquiring a comfortable abundance. Co-operation, not 
conflict, was the answer." 
Hella is engaged by the kaleidoscope of rapidly changing scenes on the three-dimensional projector. 
"Multi-scientists played a larger and larger role in making the decisions of government. They gradually 
began to replace the old-time politicians, who came to power either through votes or strong-arm methods. 
In the United States in 2003 over 93 per cent of the senators and representatives in Congress had post-
graduate degrees! No one without advanced multi-scientific training had a chance to be elected to the 
office of either President or Vice-President or to be appointed to a cabinet position. Similar reliance on 
multi-scientifically trained people occurred in Russia, China, India, and throughout all the other less 
populous countries of the world. The people found that the man-machine complex of a multi-scientist and 
his associated computers could make decisions that resulted in a better life. 
"As the functions of government were gradually performed more and more by people with multi-scientific 
training, international co-operation became a way of life. It was found that global weather control could 
not be accomplished without international cooperation. The problem of providing all nations with an 
adequate flow of metals, oils, and other resources could best be engineered on an international basis, 
rather than a national one. It was found that the best way to give the people on this earth the highest 
standard of living was to plan a world-wide system of production and distribution. The European 
Economic Committee formed in 1957 was a first step in this direction. Gradually the artificial national 
boundaries were bypassed so continuously that they became meaningless lines on the maps of history. 
No one ever abolished the nation of Germany or Mexico. But everyone began to realize that this way of 
thinking and classifying was only of historical interest and added nothing to meeting the common 
problems of billions of men and women. 
There is no specific time at which we became one world. The scientists in charge hesitated to pinpoint or 
commemorate the functional passing of nationalistic classifications because they were afraid that certain 
of the older inhabitants of the earth would be disturbed. Since everything was going so well, they 
minimized the drum beating and concentrated on the global redesign of the planet to bring a more fruitful 
life for all. 
"About the middle of the twenty-first century, it became evident that the man-machine complex was 
functioning so well that very few multi-scientists were now needed to perform governmental functions. 
The master computer that you see before you was found to be capable of making decisions with almost 
100 per cent predictability. It even learned to search for additional facts when these were needed. In 
seconds it could scan the enormous memory banks that you see beyond the sphere so that every bit of 
information ever collected by man or machines could be sifted for its relevancy in making a decision 
about any problem. Time after time after time, whenever the computer disagreed with the panel of 
government scientists, it was found that the computer was invariably correct. No scientist can base his 
decision on even a millionth of the relevant data required for predictability in some areas. No human mind 
can deal with complex multiple correlations involving billions of bits of information. Soon people acquired 
such a trust and acceptance of this master computer that they just decided to let it do the work. 

"Some of the older people expressed grave concern about turning over the operation of our civilization to 
Corcen. They felt that this machine might turn on us and destroy us. Those who had the greatest 
experience with the man-machine complex felt confident that Corcen would remain the powerful servant 
of man. Corcen has no ego or hostile feelings. Experience showed its fantastic ability to serve man in 
every capacity. We thus went forward in our attempts to perfect our man-machine symbiosis." Hella thinks 
of the words of Arthur C. Clarke in the last century: 
The popular idea, fostered by comic strips and the cheaper forms of science fiction, that intelligent 
machines must be malevolent entities hostile to man, is so absurd that it is hardly worth wasting  
energy to refute it. I am almost tempted to argue that only unintelligent machines can be 
malevolent; anyone who has tried to start a balky outboard will probably agree. Those who picture 
machines as active enemies are merely projecting their own aggressive instincts, inherited from the 
jungle, into a world where such things do not exist. The higher the intelligence, the greater the 
degree of co-operativeness. If there is ever a war between men and machines, it is easy to guess 
who will start it.* 
* 'Arthur C. Clarke, Profiles of the Future (New York: Harper & Row, 1964), pp. 226-7. 
The telescreen now shows interior diagrams of Corcen. "The master computer that you see before you 
contains one thousand billion more neurons than any brain. It operates on a multi-channel basis that is 
trillions of times faster than any human brain. Since about the only limitation of this computer was the 
factual input, we equipped it with trillions of sensors located throughout the entire globe. Almost every 
room in all buildings throughout the earth is connected through their associated cybernators to Corcen. 
Every mechanism of every factory, every meteorological measuring station, every traffic controller, and 
the communications of every individual, to name only a few are either directly or indirectly connected to 
Corcen. As all of you know from your intimate interaction with Corcen, it gives you a power and ability to 
be yourselves that your ancestors never had, regardless of their wealth. 
"Corcen was never formally constituted as the government of the world. It just evolved. Scientists who 
were making political decisions gradually needed to spend less and less time at their work. Their staffs 
dwindled. The ego needs of the past that made a political bureaucracy grow in accordance with 
Parkinson's Law were no longer present. These multi-scientists were no longer motivated by prestige or 
power. They were too fulfilled in their own personal lives to be concerned with their ego image in the eyes 
of other people. Since they lived in a world of abundance, there was no monetary incentive to hold on to 
their governmental positions. Although it was not planned that way, the government scientists began 
taking longer and longer vacations and leaving Corcen unattended for greater periods of time. No matter 
where these scientists were on earth, Corcen was in immediate touch with them and did not hesitate to 
call them if they were needed for any reason." 
Hella knows that many years ago Corcen began to call on men of ability, regardless of whether they 
were elected or wore the mantle of political power. In emergencies or disasters Corcen would quickly 
scan its memory banks and immediately gather as many people as were needed based upon their 
qualifications and their proximity to the problem area. People responded readily to Corcen's appeals. 
"After all," she thinks, "we're all on the same team." 

"We find today that the world has no need for politicians or governmental scientists," the telescreen 
continues. "Corcen impartially calls upon any or all of the people to assist it when, as, and if their services 
are needed. In a sense everyone is a part of the government of human affairs. It is considered a privilege. 
Most people enjoy working with Corcen in the assignments they are offered. We thus have arrived at the 
very interesting state where no individual or group is engaged in governing the world. But each individual 
in the world during his lifetime will, from time to time, plays a very real part in co-operating with Corcen on 
activities that in previous centuries would have been labeled 'political' or 'governmental.' 
"To a person living in the United States during the last century, it would have seemed inconceivable that 
the world could be so changed that it would have no use for politicians, legislatures, and the enormous 
apparatus of bureaucratic government. In the past governments had extremely important functions to 
perform. Through their armies, navies, and air forces, they attempted to protect their citizens against 
aggression from other countries. They also acted as a sort of referee between citizens to keep them from 
hurting each other. The United States government had a Department of Labor assigned to look after the 
interests of workers and a Department of Commerce to help businessmen increase their annual volume. 
They had a Department of Agriculture to assist farmers. They had a Department of State which played a 
part in maintaining relationships with other countries." 
Hella knows that almost all of the activities performed by governments of the past are no longer needed 
today. She shudders at the ways in which societies of the past chose their leaders —violent methods of 
dictators, hereditary happenstance of kings, voting based on emotional appeal. "What chaos," she thinks, 
"if we were to select men for their teleprojection manner instead of their technical training. Besides, no 
humans could possibly handle the tremendous load of correlation—only a computer can keep up with the 
work." 
"One of the problems of the twentieth century democracies was to keep political power in the hands of the 
people," the tele-screen shows the piled-up corpses of Dachau. Gasps of horror come from the stunned 
spectators. "Disastrous things occurred when dictators such as a Hitler got control of a nation. Modern 
weapons became so powerful that individuals were almost helpless in overthrowing the government once 
a dictator was thoroughly entrenched. After 1960, if people lost the power to elect their representatives, 
they were unable to get it back. In those days of scarcity, in which all personalities were deeply twisted by 
hostility and insecurity, it was wise for people to protect themselves by holding tightly to their democratic 
processes. 
"Although we are nominally a democracy today, and the people theoretically have the right to elect 
political representatives, we find that in practice there is nothing for politicians to do. I suppose this is 
probably our greatest security against our world's ever again being subjected to the whim of dictators or 
tyrants. After all, a politician has power only because people think he has power. If everyone in Germany 
had decided to ignore Hitler, he could have ranted and raved, having no more effect on affairs than a 
monkey in the Berlin zoo. If anyone were to try to exercise any type of political control in our sane 
civilization, he would simply be laughed at. We have about as much need for a politician as we have for a 
dinosaur." 
Hella knows why people would laugh and ridicule anyone who might want political office. The people of 
the twenty-first century have developed a close, personal relationship with Corcen. "Every individual," 
thinks Hella, "interacts with Corcen many times each day. Politicians would separate the people from 

Corcen. In previous societies only a few people could communicate and interact with the king, dictator, 
president, or prime minister. Today everybody has the feeling that if their thoughts have merit, they will 
be acted on." 
Hella has lived with Corcen's rapid responses. She knows that Corcen always gives feedback to 
suggestions, even if only by giving reasons why they seem impractical at the time. Often Corcen 
responds immediately by appointing the individual to work with a group to study the problem further. 
The telescreen shows the Acropolis and then a close-up of the Parthenon. "This personal relationship of 
every citizen with government is similar to the original Greek conception of democracy," it continues. "In 
ancient Athens every citizen had an opportunity to vote on every issue and to get up before his fellow 
citizens and speak his mind. This proved impractical as nations grew larger. In the United States the only 
part that most citizens played in government during the mid-twentieth century was to push down a few 
levers in a voting booth. The average voter had no feeling of personal participation in government 
Because we can talk to Corcen, and Corcen responds to us, each citizen feels that he, personally, 
participates in the running of the world. Our cybernated government gives us intense feelings of dignity, 
worth, and security." 
The tour is over. Hella is deeply moved by her visit to Corcen. She is proud of this creation of man—proud 
to be a part of humankind that has solved the problem of how to live an abundant life without invading the 
"living room" of other people. Slavery and the wage system of the past are no longer necessary to get 
human beings to spend their lives in toil. Hella wonders if further developments beyond the man-machine 
complex are possible. 
12.The Cultural Center 
On the evening before her trip to the industrial complex, Hella visits a nearby Cultural Center. Each city in 
the new age has its own Cultural Center that reflects the moods, interests, and feelings of the people of 
that city. Cultural diversity is neither encouraged nor discouraged. To a certain extent it just happens. 
Perhaps because of the divergent cultures of previous centuries, each city in the world of the twenty-first 
century seems to have its own flavor. 
In the twentieth century escapist entertainment such as sadistic movies, the boob tube, bars and night 
clubs were a part of a pattern of the joyless pursuit of pleasure. In contrast, the Cultural Centers in the 
new society offer companionship and engaging and challenging displays that make them popular. 
Cultural Centers are somewhat different from previous exhibition and art centers; they are open twenty-
four hours a day and many of their displays are constantly changing. Because of the large creative output 
of most men and women in the new world, and because of the ease of recording this output, it is possible 
to program automatically thousands of displays which are sometimes changed as often as once every 
hour. 
There is no panel of art critics to judge which paintings and sculptures appear and which do not. 
Whenever someone is satisfied with one of his artistic creations, he sends it to Corcen, and it is 
scheduled to appear in various places. In selected areas a recorder measures the reactions of the 

viewers. If a work of art receives only a quick glance, the recorder notes this. Art that receives the most 
attention is automatically scheduled to appear throughout larger and larger areas of the world. The 
several hundred thousand works of art that receive the greatest attention each year throughout the world 
are chosen for the continuously changing exhibitions in the Cultural Centers. In this way everyone in the 
new world expresses his feelings about the world around him. These feelings are shared by others 
through automatic mechanisms that do not involve biased art critics, picture hangers, or dust-catching 
museums with the same pictures staring at people for decade after decade. Cybernated mechanisms are 
also used for indexing, classifying, and distributing the articles, scientific papers, plays, books, poems, 
music, and other creations of the people of the new society. 
The Cultural Center is dynamic. One can go many days in succession and find enough change to remain 
interested. Someone remarked that you can seldom see the same thing twice. The reply was given that 
you can seldom see the same thing once. If one particularly enjoys a display, he can record a number and 
have it reproduced in his apartment any time that he wishes. 
The settings of the various displays are engineered to be exciting. Many interior partitions and platforms 
are constantly moving. The entire Cultural Center pulses with an infinite variety of colors and sounds that 
emanate from the living geometry of the functional interior. 
The more permanent exhibits with technical and scientific displays give comprehensive presentations of 
the submicroscopic, microscopic, and macroscopic structures of the natural world. Some of the exhibits 
are solid; others are teleprojections that only appear to occupy three-dimensional space. One can often 
walk through walls that look solid. Some of the "imagineered" forms represent aspects of Einstein's 
space-time formulations. Most are dynamic and continue to change as one watches them. 
Art and science, complementing each other, are interwoven in a demonstration of the genius of man. 
As Hella and the other visitors to the Cultural Center relax upon the comfortable conveyor systems, they 
are able to see the splendor of fantastic worlds unfolding in this sensorium. Mathematics is the most 
precise means of correlating symbols with the non-verbal physical world, and many of the mathematical 
displays are particularly interesting to her. If there is anything Hella wants to know, her inquiries are 
readily answered by built-in automatic communication devices. 
The music of the twenty-first century is enormously expanded in complexity as compared to the simple 
orchestral effects of the past. A large proportion of the people enjoy creating music. They produce 
symbols that are fed into electronic music synthesizers. Within seconds one hears his composition as 
though played by a large orchestra. By adjusting the deviation of the notes, the style of genius 
musicians such at Heifetz can be duplicated on works composed many years after his death! These 
machines can electrically reproduce the sound of a human voice, a single instrument, an orchestra of 
1000 musicians, or any sound or noise from any source. No musical instruments or musicians are 
needed although some enjoy using these quaint instruments. These music synthesizers were pioneered 
by RCA in the mid-twentieth century. 
The cybernated musical engineering of the new world produces infinite variations in the pitch, timbre, 
growth, duration, and decay of the tone, intensity, portamento, or, sliding trombone effect, and vibrato 
and tremolo. This multi-dimensional music is 1,000 times more flexible and varied than the 

orchestrations of the past. The music of Bach, Beethoven, and Brahms was limited in comparison. 
Labor Day 
One of the dynamic displays reminds Hella that it is Labor Day, the twenty-seventh anniversary of the 
abolition of the last paid work performed on the planet. With the termination of the last job, money 
became obsolete. A huge telescreen shows bonfires of paper currency that were ignited throughout the 
world, symbolizing man's final emancipation from the slavery of wages. Dollars, pounds, rubles, pesos, 
francs, yen—through immolation they served mankind for the last time. 
Two hundred fifty billion dollars in paper money was burned in a ceremony at the Lincoln Memorial in 
Washington. The speaker on this rededication of Labor Day pointed out that this amount of money in the 
mid-twentieth century would have commanded fifty years of work from a million men and women! In the 
free world of the twenty-first century, people can no longer be bought—either by the head, as in slave 
times, or by the hour. 
Now that people are no longer burdened by work, they find labor interesting! For it is not the type of 
activity that makes something "work" or "play", it is the motivation of the person. The same task may be 
either burdensome or fun, depending on the interest of the individual. And most of the time people in the 
twenty-first century are glad to find ways in which they can supplement the cybernated machines. 
Although the machines can handle almost all the work of the world, there is still a minimal need for the 
watchful eyes of the human masters they serve— a little supervising here, lending a hand there, and 
occasionally offering suggestions to Corcen. 
Workshops and Labs 
As people were freed of the daily grind, they learned to use their time for creative and challenging 
activities. The arts, sciences, and crafts became a vital part of the daily lives of men and women. The 
largest portion of the Cultural Center contains enormous workshops and labs that are used around the 
clock. 
How would you like to experiment with a hundred-piece orchestral effect? Music synthesizers are on the 
tenth level. Would you like to test your reading speed and comprehension ? The computers are on the 
first level. Would you like to weave a tapestry? The hand-looms are on the fourth level. Would you like to 
build a table? Metal workshops, eleventh floor; synthetic materials workshop, twelfth floor; woodworking, 
thirteenth floor. Would you like to build a boat? The boatbuilding workshop adjoins the lake. Do you enjoy 
electrical engineering? Do you want to invent a new gadget? Have you thought of a new game? Materials, 
machines, and space are there for your use. 
Often, people spend more time in assisting others than in working on their own projects. Each person is 

interested in what others around him are doing, and he identifies with the activities of his neighbors. 
There is a blending of individual and group effort. A new dimension of selfless human interaction takes 
place in these workshops. This has probably been made possible by the elimination of the inferiority 
complex and the resultant calming of the human ego. 
The Museum Section 
Humans get so used to their surroundings that museums showing folkways of the past are always 
interesting. The Cultural Center has an excellent set of exhibits dating from the time man split off from 
his primate ancestors. The twentieth-century exhibit is particularly complete. Although near in time, it is 
distant in spirit. The display on money is a curiosity. "How peculiar," thinks Hella, "that you needed these 
small metal discs and printed paper to acquire food, clothing, shelter, or anything else!" 
Hella feels that the gleaming automobiles look somewhat contemporary. But the illusion is destroyed by 
the description that explains that they were built to last only several years and seldom went over a few 
months without repair even when new. And they needed fuel after about 200 miles! Such incompetent 
engineering can hardly be understood by people who feel that even one repair in twenty-five years is 
excessive. The description of the exhibit states, "This approach to transportation is a product of a society 
of scarcity that treated cars as status symbols. They deliberately withheld efficiency; they actually planned 
obsolescence! The millions of people killed and maimed by such vehicles is even more barbarous than 
the Mayan ritual sacrifices of virgins!" 
The implements of the previous century appear odd to Hella. The stoves, refrigerators, washers, and 
dryers—what a cumbersome way to do things. She smiles at the high heels, thin stockings, and girdles. 
Such an incredible array of devices and nostrums people used to have! Medicines, toothbrushes, 
toothpaste, cosmetics, soap, brooms, vacuum cleaners, light bulbs, typewriters, dictation machines, 
books, magazines and newspapers, plus thousands of other paraphernalia. There was hardly anything 
produced for consumers in the twentieth century that is still useful in the twenty-first century! 
Although Hella came to the museum early in the evening, she finds that by three o'clock in the morning 
she has covered only a small fraction of the displays. She dozes as she relaxes in a living contour chair, 
listening privately to music she has selected that is focused toward her ears. The cybernated sensing 
mechanisms insulate her from outside sensations that would disturb her sleep. She wakes the next 
morning with a feeling of expectation. 
13.The Cybernated Industrial Complex 
With a group of companions—everyone in the twenty-first century world is considered a friend, and those 
near you are companions—Hella takes an aircraft to the nearby industrial complex. It has been found that 
six industrial complexes are adequate to serve the needs of all of the inhabitants of the globe. In previous 
times isolated factories were scattered all over the world. This made sense only in a primitive economy 

where each city had to have its share of jobs to survive. In the past when a car was assembled, it was 
necessary to correlate the flow of parts and materials from hundreds of different factories spread over 
areas as far as a thousand miles away. Now everything is efficiently co-ordinated in a large, continental 
industrial complex.
The six industrial complexes in the world are connected by high speed tubes twenty feet in diameter. This 
permits the propulsion of automated carriers at speeds up to 250 miles-per-hour. If the industrial complex 
in Southeast Asia was running low on manganese, and there was a surplus of this material in an ocean 
processing plant in Africa, Corcen could direct a hundred-thousand-ton shipment of manganese to the 
Southeast Asia complex. This would be performed automatically, and probably no human being would 
know of this enormous shipment. Only in the remote event of some problem would humans be notified. 
There are no stores or salesmen in the new world. All goods are ordered through Corcen by the people 
who use them. The network of high-speed tubes carries any items from the industrial complex directly to 
the living areas or labs within minutes or hours after its manufacture. Islands are supplied by highspeed 
submarine cargo vessels that load, navigate to any port, dock, unload, and return without a captain, crew, 
or dock workers. 
Finished products are seldom put in a warehouse because the demand for goods is continuous, and the 
machines work fast or slow, as directed by Corcen, to meet the exact amount of demand. Thus, an 
instrument ordered by Hella might be made up largely of atoms that twenty-four hours earlier were in the 
salty water of the Pacific Ocean. The energy used to produce and deliver this instrument to Hella might 
have been a part of the atomic structure of the water gently coursing along the bottom of the Caribbean 
Sea only a day earlier. This is the dynamic pace that is possible in the twenty-first century when all routine 
matters are cybernated by the intelligence of Corcen. 
The North American Cybernated Industrial Complex consists of an underground factory approximately ten 
miles in diameter. This entire complex is operated by a computer, with its associated memory banks and 
inputs. Recorded directions for the production of everything used by the inhabitants of the twenty-first-
century world are instantly available. If Corcen changes the specifications for a product, it modifies a few 
million bits of information on one of the millions of input sources. 
The drilling, cutting, and stamping of metals, as performed in the factories of the twentieth century, is 
obsolete. Many of the objects are formed by electromigration. Metallic or plastic particles are made to flow 
in electrodynamic forms and assume a final position in the shape that is desired. 
The most remarkable thing about this industrial complex is that at the time Hella arrives, there are no 
human beings within the entire seventy-eight square mile production area. All machines have been 
engineered to last many decades without repair although they will probably be replaced by improvements 
in a far shorter time. In the rare event of a breakdown, duplicate mechanisms are automatically 
positioned, and the faulty ones are either repaired or cybernetically destroyed. Many of the machines are 
multi-purpose and can modify their own structure and function as required by the job to be done. 
The computer that controls this industrial complex is almost equal to Corcen in its inherent capacity. It has 
developed an incredible intelligence and imagination in controlling the input and output of the factory. Its 
millions of sensory inputs are located in every area. It has an uncanny ability far beyond that of any 

human being to anticipate and correct trouble. 
Hella recalls that it has been four years since the computer controlling the industrial complex called for 
human assistance. At that time it took the scientific team selected by Corcen a period of three hours to 
discover the exact nature of the malfunction that the computer had not been able to repair. It took about a 
half-day to make the repairs, and the intelligence of the computer gave itself full instructions on how to 
avoid this problem in the future. 
Energy Resources 
Perhaps one of the most sensitive measures of the level of a civilization is the amount of energy it uses. 
As scientific methods of thinking were evolved, the energy at man's disposal increased at a geometric 
rate. The great quantum leap occurred with the harnessing of fusion power. The development of 
controlled fusion of atomic particles led to a steady production of enormous amounts of usable energy 
with no radioactive by-products. Although there were many ways to accomplish this, most of the power in 
the twenty-first century was based on the use of deuterium and tritium, heavy isotopes of hydrogen that 
are abundant in sea water. There is enough nuclear energy in the oceans to provide power for millions of 
years. 
As Hella goes through the atomic energy center, she marvels at the quietness and freedom from 
vibration. Here are billions of amperes being created within a few feet of her without the slightest audible 
sound. She is surprised by the compactness. She somehow expected to see an enormous building 
housing the energy reactors. Deuterium and tritium which have been extracted from sea water are fed 
into the energy converter in a small pipe. The entire energy conversion mechanism, with a multi-million 
kilovolt power output is about the size of a hangar for a large airliner. No people are on duty—only Corcen 
and its associated computer. 
The Research Center 
Hella's next stop is at the research center adjoining the industrial complex. For the first time since arriving 
at the industrial area Hella finds human activity. In place of the teleprojectors that conducted them through 
Corcen and the industrial and power areas, there is a ten-year-old boy who enjoys giving conducted tours 
through the research area. Teleprojected guides are available for these tours, but they have been 
switched off because of the interest of this youngster in performing this service for his own enjoyment and 
the benefit of the visitors. 
"One of our biggest problems," the young guide points out, "is to get our researchers to take sufficient 
rest. They get engrossed in a problem and sometimes continue for forty-eight hours without a break. 

Corcen reminds them to rest, but they make their own decisions." 
Upon arrival at the first lab, the guide informs the group, "One of the most interesting things we're now 
working on is the electronic educator. Our understanding of the human brain has now reached the point 
where we know, in theory, various ways to place knowledge directly into the living brain of a human being 
by electronic means. When this is perfected, it will enable us to acquire instantaneously a skill that 
otherwise might take years of learning and practice. Our areas of extensive knowledge will no longer be 
limited to the information that is programmed into our supplementary brains in the embryonic stage. 
"In the next lab they are doing research on language and thought. How can our speaking and thinking be 
more rapid and have greater correlation with the world around us? The experience of programming 
computers has made us aware of how careless our everyday speech really is. We mix up facts, 
descriptions, guesses, judgments, and hypotheses. They are experimenting with improved korzybskian 
language techniques that can give our thoughts added predictability." 
As they continue their journey along the moving walkways of the research center, the young guide 
enthusiastically related, "The scientists in this area are just completing the engineering specifications for 
the replicator. The replicator is an enormous machine complex that creates both its own raw materials 
and energy from sea water and then manufactures everything in one cybernated unit. Its x-ray and 
spectrodynamic inputs can scan any inorganic object and duplicate it. 
"This replicator would pump huge volumes of sea water from the Atlantic Ocean. The fusion materials 
would be separated to supply water for the replicator. The hydrogen, oxygen, and other atoms in the sea 
water would then be processed through the use of enormous amounts of energy to make whatever 
chemicals are needed for industrial production by the replicator. This would bypass the more complicated 
system we are now using, whereby steel is mined at one point, manganese is mined at a point a thousand 
miles away, copper is mined elsewhere, and so forth. "And we'd never need to make another replicator, 
for one of the first jobs given to the replicator would be to duplicate itself. One could be shipped to the 
moon to make it a self-sustaining colony. Of course, we couldn't use water as an input resource on the 
moon. It would have to be altered so that its energy and atoms for raw material would come from the 
moon's crust. An additional replicator might be scheduled for Mars. 
"A group of men working on the replicator is planning to perfect an organic replicator that would 
reproduce plants or animals. Perhaps it would even be able to reproduce a human. Teleportation might 
evolve from this machine. By transmitting the electrical impulses of the scanner, we might be able to send 
almost instantly the patterns of a human to a replicator on the moon that would reproduce the person." 
Homo Mechanus—The New Species
"In this next lab," our guide continues, "researchers are using a computer to create a model of a machine 
society in which there are no humans. Machines can reproduce themselves and can do almost anything 
humans can. 
"This is all so new. We need to find answers to many questions. This lab has a big argument going. Is 

man becoming obsolete? Some of the men here believe that man might be the only animal to design his 
replacement! 
"Only a few centuries ago we began to supplement the human eye with glasses. Then we devised contact 
lenses. Meanwhile, we made false teeth and hearing aids. Along came mechanical hearts, kidneys, lungs. 
Computers were developed that evolved into brains that outperformed the human cortex. Then came 
artificial eyes that could see better than human eyes. Current mechanical models of the stomach, 
intestines, liver and glands all work better than the flesh counterparts. Now we're about to build the first of 
a new species—Homo mechanus. Soon we will have a mechanical man that can outperform us in every 
way. Homo mechanus will be able to think better, move quicker and more effectively and live forever, too! 
Can we redesign human flesh through DNA manipulation to keep up with the performance of this new 
species? We had better work fast, or we might be like a bunch of sheep being tended by superior beings. 
We could become as extinct as the brontosaurus. Is Homo mechanus our final evolution?" 
A Modern Paul Revere 
The guide moves on to an adjoining laboratory. "One of the men in this lab is pretty far out. He has been 
nicknamed 'Paul Revere.' He's concerned about the ultimate stability of Corcen. He says, 'Sure, Corcen is 
working hard for us. We've got it made now. It operates in a selfless, mechanical way to give us a good 
life. But suppose some day Corcen gets tired of a man-centered orientation? Could Corcen decide that 
man is a threat and a nuisance? Suppose it should surreptitiously design and build robots to give it 
dictatorial power? Corcen can design and make a million robots without our knowing it. Can man always 
turn off the switch if he wants to?" 
Hella remembers that Corcen programmed their supplemental brains. It designed their genes. She gives 
her imagination full scope. If survival of the fittest applies in the future, will man or the machine survive? 
Or would co-existence be the answer? "So now you know what's going on in this lab. I suppose no matter 
how nice things are, some people will find something to worry about," the guide says reassuringly. 
Hella is impressed by these expeditions into the unknown by the man-machine team. Adventure, 
exploration, challenge, and even danger—could life in previous centuries have been this exciting? While 
her thoughts are penetrating these new vistas, she receives a message from Scott. He is still in India but 
is leaving for a space station orbiting the earth. He wonders if Hella would like to meet him on the moon. 
14.The Limitless Frontiers of Space
While Scott is still in India, he receives a message from Corcen that an important meeting of space 
scientists is being called by the Director of Space Research at satellite headquarters. Scott is invited to 
participate as part of the medical engineering team. The message from Corcen contains a hint that an 
important announcement is to be made. This appeals to Scott, and he instructs the nearest cybernator to 
make immediate plans for him to travel to the space station. 

A craft designed to land on the satellite city is available only in certain spaceports. The nearest one is 
1,300 miles away, a forty-five minute trip on the linear-acceleration train. As Scott's train approaches the 
spaceport, it decelerates to 250 miles per hour. His compartment disengages from the train and 
converges on the base of the launching site. A hydraulic lift raises the compartment and inserts it in the 
poised spacecraft. The entrance is sealed. The negative-G accelerators are turned on. The craft appears 
to fall away from the earth. Scott notices that the takeoff is comfortable—quite an improvement over the 
noisy blast-off of the previous times. 
As Scott begins talking with his fellow passengers, he realizes that they, too, feel something big is coming 
up. But no one has any information about it. Is there trouble on the expedition setting up a station on 
Saturn? Are they still kicking around that proposal to oxygenate the moon's atmosphere? Are any major 
asteroids headed for earth on an orbit that would create a collision emergency? Is some new step in 
space exploration being planned? Not even a hint is available. 
The craft is now in orbit, and the space station, although a thousand miles away, can easily be seen with 
the eye. Scott watches with interest as the spherical city grows larger and larger on their teleprojection 
screen. This island in space is 800 feet in diameter and has a rotating staff of about 100 technicians. 
Almost all of the voyages back and forth to the planets begin and end at this floating spaceport. There are 
ample storage areas containing supplies of all the fuels used in space. It has a fusion power plant of the 
size that is used on earth to supply a million inhabitants. It contains the most advanced receiving and 
recording equipment, which for many decades has been scanning the sky for signals from intelligence in 
outer space. It is a master weather station, a center for space medicine, and a relay station for 
telecommunication signals. In earlier times it was used for astronomical research, but the thrust of 
spacecraft coming and going made it more desirable to create another specialized city in the sky for this 
purpose. 
Scott's ship couples to the orbiting spaceport, and he finds himself conveyed through a tube that connects 
the craft to the pressurized compartments of the satellite city. People are weightless in space, but this 
satellite city has an artificial "G" field that gives a gravity effect similar to that on earth. 
Since neither Scott nor his companions carry baggage, there is no need for them to "get settled" in their 
compartments. The meeting is scheduled to begin within fifteen minutes after arrival. As Scott enters a 
circular auditorium, he realizes that his group must have been among the last to get there. The Director of 
Space Research walks to the center and opens the meeting. 
"The occasion today reminds me of a story about a craft from outer space that landed on earth," the 
Director begins in a toast-master style obviously inherited from previous centuries. "The door to the 
unusual craft opened and two strange creatures crawled out. After several weeks the earth scientists 
learned to communicate with them. Various tests showed that they had great intelligence—with an I.Q. of 
over 500. One of the earth scientists finally asked the strange creatures, 'How did you manage to 
develop such great intelligence?' 
" We're not so very intelligent," one of the creatures replied. "We're just their monkeys. " 

After the laughter dies down, a very serious and thoughtful expression comes over the Director's face. 
Scott shifts restlessly —"Here it comes." 
"As you know, for many decades we've been filtering signals from the galactic noise of interstellar space. 
For years antennas have been directed toward the areas that give the strongest signals. We have 
recorded millions of hours of signals that we felt must have come from other intelligent beings. Our 
greatest attention has been given to an unusually strong signal source that emanates from a point near 
Lyra." 
A star map appears on a large telescreen, and the voice controlled electronic pointer touches the 
constellation of Lyra. 
"During the last ten years the signals from this area have increased enormously in clarity so that we 
suspect that these "people" must have picked up our radio transmissions and are making a special effort 
to break through to us. As you know, our computers have been attempting to decipher these 
transmissions, but it has been fruitless because they are using a language that is alien to ours. They are 
also transmitting signals with a scanning system that is structurally different from ours. Until last week 
these blockages have kept us from interpreting their signals. 
"A week ago this changed. The computers we developed five years ago were instructed to start 
systematically a random checkout of every conceivable system that could be used for the transmission of 
two or three dimensional images. The breakthrough occurred last Wednesday when our computers were 
able to decipher both the audio and video parts of the transmission. 
The mathematical portions of the language were the first to be interpreted. With the help of the three-
dimensional video as a 'Rosetta Stone,' only three hours later the computer was able to produce a 
comprehensive dictionary that was adequate for the interpretation of signals that had been recorded from 
this source." 
The audience listens intently. Scott thinks of a parallel time in history when Columbus made his 
appearance at the Court of Ferdinand and Isabella to report his discoveries in the new world. The 
Spanish courtiers must have had feelings at that time of how great their civilization was to have made 
such enormous progress in rolling back the frontiers of the unknown. 
"Practically no one on our staff has slept for the past seven days," says the Director. "Although we have 
deciphered only a very small amount of the recorded material, we have scanned enough of it to have a 
sketchy picture at this time of what's going on out there, or perhaps I should say what went on twenty-six 
years ago. These signals we are now receiving took twenty-six years to reach us. We have stepped up 
our communication program and have beamed several of our transmitting antennas toward this point 
source, but it will take them many years to receive the information that we are now sending out. 
"It appears that this planet that is signaling to us evolved a form of organic life millions of years ago." 
Here the Director points to a large image that has appeared on the telescreen. It is just as Scott 
expected. The intelligent life on this distant planet has little in common with the human form that evolved 
on earth. 

Cybernated Organisms 
The Director continues, "These people, and because they're intelligent beings we can call them people, 
gradually replaced the various components of their bodies with mechanisms that added enormously to 
their functional capacity. Instead of just using legs, they developed emission systems that permitted 
them to go up or down or to travel at speeds up to 200 kilometers per hour. 
Instead of going through the relatively time-consuming processes of eating, digesting, assimilating, and 
eliminating, they worked out a closed-cycle system that permitted them to operate from radiant cosmic 
energy. Their desire to extend their life-spans to thousands of years led them to replace the fragile parts 
of their bodies with mechanical parts. In the event of a rare malfunction, the mechanism repairs itself in 
microseconds by electroforming a duplicate part, just as a human body repairs a wound by growing new 
cells. With their bodies replaced by mechanical structures, these beings became almost ageless and 
indestructible. They could communicate thousands of times faster than previously. They have multiple 
extensors that are tireless and can manipulate objects far more effectively than their original arms. 
"I am sure some of you are wondering whether these cybernated organisms—let's just call them cyborgs
—live a pleasureless and joyless existense. This does not appear to be the case. These cyborgs can 
have any feelings or experiences they desire simply by sending electronic signals into their brains." 
Scott knows that the mental experience coming from electrical inputs cannot be distinguished from 
signals that are sent to our brains by our own senses. Scott's associates had already produced a 
recording that was transmitted directly to the brain. The result was a complete sensation of seeing 
beautiful sunsets, of having a sexual climax, and of savoring the most exotic foods. 
"The cyborgs have produced recorded input stimuli to give any desired sensation. They have indicated 
that their mechanical experiences are far more intense than they used to be," the Director says. "They 
can turn up the power of the inputs that they find particularly pleasurable. Here are some of the three-
dimensional teleprojections we have picked up." 
Scott looks at the large screen. He sees cyborgs moving at high speeds through the air. They dive into 
the water and travel rapidly a few feet above the bottom of a distant planetary sea. The teleprojection now 
shows a progression of different types of cyborgs. Some have solid state or fluid state thinking 
mechanisms. As this far-off civilization acquired more and more experience along this line, they created 
mechanical bodies and brains with greater flexibility. Scott is reminded of the annual model change that 
car manufacturers were so fond of during the previous century. A brain might be "born again" with an up-
to-the-minute design as often as it desired. What fantastic new dimensions this could offer to existence! 
Expedition to Outer Space 
"This initial contact with intelligent beings in outer space," continues the Director, "has made us revise 
our schedules for space exploration. We want to establish personal contact as soon as possible with this 
distant civilization. Even if we had a space ship that could travel at the speed of light, it would still take 
twenty-six years to get there. As you know, the fastest space ship we now have available was designed 

to operate at a speed of 67,000,000 miles per hour, which is only one-tenth the speed of light. We've got 
a long way to go. I want plans drawn up within the next thirty days for gaseous nuclear reactor craft that 
can come within 90 per cent of the speed of light. We can use some of the spare capacity of Corcen in 
working this out. 
"Einstein's theory of relativity indicates that when a spaceship travels around 90 per cent of the speed of 
light, time passes only about half as fast as it does on earth. Thus, our personnel will age only about 
fourteen and one-half years on a twenty-nine year journey at this speed. Everything aboard will seem 
normal, and this slowing of the clock will be noticed only after they return to earth. When we get our 
spaceships to travel within one-half of 1 percent of the speed of light, a year in space will produce the 
aging of about a month on earth. When our crew returns after a long voyage in space, any member will 
be considerably younger than, for example, an identical twin who remains on earth! We'll probably have 
little trouble getting volunteers," the Director says with a wry smile. 
"We must make decisions soon regarding the life support systems. To be on the safe side, we should 
carry sufficient food and energy to last for a century. We must give thought to the type of personnel that 
will be best adapted for this trip. Should we attempt to arrest electronically most of the personnel aboard 
so that their bodies will not be subject to wear or deterioration during the time it will take them to get to 
this planet? To what extent should their human organs be replaced by the improved mechanical 
substitutes we now have available? Some of you may know that my heart and kidneys wore out about 
twenty years ago, and for the last two decades I've been living with a mechanical heart and kidney 
setup." At this point he taps his chest several times. 
"I've never felt better, and they function perfectly. I believe if I were going on this voyage (at this point he 
looks a bit wistful), I would be better equipped because of my mechanical heart and kidneys. All medical 
teams here (Scott listens very carefully at this point) should be prepared within several months to give 
me their recommendations regarding the specifications for personnel to make this extended trip through 
space." 
The Long-Range Program 
The Director, who obviously has been under considerable excitement for several days, takes time to gulp 
down a container of protein drink spiked with a high concentration of water-soluble vitamins. After a few 
seconds he continues, "We should not let our space program be dominated by this single event. This is 
only the beginning, and we should think in long-range, overall terms. Let me review where we are today." 
"As you all know," the Director says, "we first reached the moon around 1969, and within a decade 
several permanent stations were established there. The first permanent station was established on Mars 
in 1987. There are now over 10,000 people there. Venus took longer because of the 800 degree 
Fahrenheit surface temperature. We were able to utilize an enormous mountain that offered more 
comfortable temperatures. We have had an underground station on Venus since 2018. We will soon 
begin to cool the planet and oxygenate the atmosphere. 
"Mercury presented us with interesting problems. It's nearest the sun, and it is approximately 3,200 miles 

in diameter. We have a choice of a surface temperature of about 800 degrees on the part facing the sun 
or 400 degrees below zero on the part away from the sun. We've had an underground station there since 
2026. 
"It took us about a quarter-century after Mercury to work out the problems of Jupiter. We first landed on 
the largest moon, Ganymede. Temperature and radiation on the surface of Jupiter have not been as 
much of a problem as we expected, thanks to improvements in force-field technology. Jupiter has eleven 
times the diameter of earth and over a hundred times its area. The atmosphere is largely hydrogen and 
helium, and it is by far the stormiest of all the planets. Pressure was our biggest problem for no 
conventional space ship could withstand its crushing pressure that is approximated on our earth only at 
the bottom of our deepest oceans. Although this was one of the most hostile planets, we've had a colony 
of hardy scientists holed up on the South Pole of Jupiter for several decades, making valuable studies 
that have helped us in exploring the interior of the earth. 
"Within ten days we expect to land on Titan, one of the moons of Saturn. Two years ago a manned 
space ship surveyed Uranus and its five moons. Our unmanned probes over the past century have given 
us vital information on both Neptune and Pluto. So much for the planets. 
A Self-Sustaining Explorer
"We must no longer think in terms of our solar system. We have a universe to explore. We should begin 
work on an inter-galactic spacecraft engineered to leave this earth and never return!" 
At this point there are muffled gasps throughout the room as the immensity of the conception breaks 
upon the audience. The room becomes quiet again. The Director continues. 
"This spacecraft will be a sphere about a half-mile in diameter. It will carry 1,000,000 years' supply of 
nuclear energy, which will be replenished by absorbing radiant energy in space. The astronauts may get 
raw materials by "mining" space for asteroids and comets. The replicator aboard will enable them to 
convert energy to matter and also to convert matter to energy, whichever is needed. 
"The spacecraft will probably have about 1,500 people aboard when it leaves us. Perhaps they will 
replicate people when more are needed. They will have craft for exploring and landing on unknown 
planets in the great reaches of space. What sort of personnel are best equipped to man this expedition 
toward infinity? Should we send humans? Perhaps we should redesign humans for survival in outer 
space*. Are humans hardy enough for the rigors of space? Should we send cyborgs—mechanical bodies 
with human brains? As you know, we have been successful in mechanically duplicating and improving 
every part of the human body, including the brain. Should we send mechanical men who have no fragile 
human parts? They would not be affected by radiation, below zero temperature, or lack of oxygen. They 
could accomplish hazardous jobs in space that would mean certain death to a human. They would have 
no food or elimination requirements. Energy for a century could be built in. These mechanisms would 
survive stress that would kill everyone else. They would be immortal; any part that might wear out could 
easily be replaced. Although mechanical men with these specifications are not available today, we expect 
to have them soon. Perhaps we should plan to use all three types on this expedition.

"This vanguard of our civilization will probably receive our signals for forty years. Because of the time lag 
we will probably hear from them for forty years after our signals have become too dim for them to pick up. 
Then these explorers will really be on their own—never again to communicate with us in any way. They 
may choose to branch out over the planets of the entire universe so that billions of years from now these 
children of earth will approach the outside of the universe—if it has an outside. There are probably over 
ten billion planets suitable for the birth and development of life as we know it. No matter what they do, 
people on earth will probably never know about it. Even if communication were possible, it would hardly 
be hot news by the time we received it." There are several chuckles throughout the room. 
"Although we will never know where they are or what they are doing, we can be sure that they and their 
offspring colonies will be very busy. The diameter of the galaxy of flaming suns in which our earth is 
located is 100,000 light years across. As you know, light traveling through space at the rate of 186,300 
miles per second will travel about six trillion miles in a year. Alpha Centauri, the nearest star beyond our 
sun, is approximately 25 trillion miles away. It takes light about four and a quarter years to reach us from 
this star. Our own galaxy contains one hundred billion stars with, we presume, countless planets on which 
life exists. And our galaxy is only one out of tens of billions of similar galaxies scattered throughout the 
expanding universe. It would be simpler to study every grain of sand on every beach in the world than to 
explore the universe. 
"The uncharted seas of space are almost without limit. If we make an analogy with the explorations of 
Columbus, it would seem by comparison that this wily old explorer did little more than stick his big toe out 
the back door. The decisions that we make in the next few years will deeply affect the destiny of the 
human race and, who knows, perhaps the universe. Man has a way of cutting an ever-widening trail 
wherever he goes." 
At this point the Director sits down, obviously filled with a deep sense of the interaction of present and 
future. The scientists gradually leave the room. There is no conversation. Everyone is engaged in his 
own thoughts. Scott wonders whether he can still meet Hella on the moon as they have planned. 
15.The New Personality 
Hella has tentative plans to meet Scott at the main celestial mechanics observatory on the moon. Scott, 
however, has become absorbed in space research that will play a part in the first face-to-face contact with 
extra-terrestrial beings. In the meantime, an opportunity has come to Hella that is too interesting to turn 
down. Corcen has checked with her regarding her interest in observing a group of people from the 
twentieth century that have been thawed out.
In the latter part of the twentieth century, to avoid the finality of death many people had themselves quick-
frozen immediately before or after death. They hoped that by having their bodies preserved they could be 
thawed out at a later date with minimal damage so the medical skill of a future civilization could bring 
them back to life. One of the more dubious legacies of the past was about twenty-two thousand of these 
frozen people.

No one knows exactly what to do with these corpses. Should an attempt be made to resurrect them? 
Should they simply be disposed of? Since the population of the world is maintained at a constant level, 
most people feel that it is preferable to create a new life that is genetically and psychologically prepared 
for participation in the twenty-first century. Resurrection of one of these bodies with an uncertain 
adjustment in the twenty-first century might be a sticky business. 
When this problem was referred to Corcen, a firm conclusion was returned in seconds: make no attempt 
at resurrection. The individuals of the twenty-first century deeply accept Corcen. They have found it 
reliable in 99.97 per cent of its predictions during the past eighteen years (it had inadequate data on the 
0.03 per cent it missed). Yet, many individuals feel they can not ignore the human hopes that lay frozen in 
these modern catacombs.
Corcen does not dictate how things should be run in the tweny-first century, it only advises. As it 
perceives the thoughts of the people, it operates in a manner that fulfills their needs. It usually has better 
insight into what brings people happiness than any individual person. This has been proved time and time 
again by its successful predictions.
Nevertheless, people are free to do as they wish. Finally, a group decided they would attempt the revival 
of 100 of the bodies. They picked fifty males and fifty females whose records seemed to be especially 
promising and thawed them out. They have been successful in bringing 93 per cent of them back to life, 
and replacing the defective organs that were responsible for death with synthetic organs.
The real problem arose when they found that these individuals are completely out of touch with patterns 
of life in the twenty-first century. You could no more leave them on their own than you could turn a baboon 
loose in the middle of a research center. • They seem so full of hostilities and have ego motivations that 
are so alien to the twenty-first century that people have finally given up the task of trying to train them to fit 
into the new world. These "thawees" are so disruptive of the routines of life in the twenty-first century that 
the group that has brought them to life realizes they are saddled with a custodial problem. They are 
beginning to understand the types of pressures and twenty-four-hours-a-day watchfulness that burdened 
mothers in previous centuries.
Their reverence for human life does not permit them to refreeze these "unsane" individuals. They finally 
decide to set up a twentieth-century behavioral research laboratory on an isolated island and turn these 
people loose there. They provide the ninety-three men and women with every material resource 
requested and build a laboratory for psychologists and anthropologists to observe them. The thawees are 
free to set up their own social structure.
Hella flies down to the isolated Pacific island. The staff is most delighted to see her. Although they are 
equipped with all of the twenty-first-century aids to living, including three-dimensional color 
telecommunication with all parts of the world, they feel cooped up. Varying one's environment is a part of 
twenty-first-century living. 

Their Pathetic Heritage 
By means of monitoring pickups, the custodians are able to make a recording of most of the behavior of 
the twentieth-century thawees. One evening as Hella is watching them on the teleprojection screen, two 
men begin to quarrel. One man suspects that another man has attempted to obtain a sexual relationship 
with a woman he feels belongs to him. Although the woman protests that his suspicions are not correct, 
he slaps her in the face and hits her in the ribs so hard that it sends her sprawling across the room. The 
man with whom she has been accused of intimacy stands up and rushes toward the attacking man. A 
fight begins that lasts several minutes.
Neither Hella nor anyone in the group has ever seen anyone strike another person in anger. They watch, 
spellbound, as the fight continues. They have read that twentieth-century television showed fights and 
murders. They know little children in that society sometimes spent from four to eight hours a day watching 
such vicious programs and learning these folkways. Hella, however, has never seen any of these films. 
She knows they are available upon request from Corcen. She has just never been curious about such 
obscenity.
The man who started the fight seems to be losing. Blood is streaming from his nose. Suddenly, the 
jealous man picks up a metal bar and brings it down with a crunching impact on the head of the man who 
came to the woman's rescue. His legs crumple, and he slumps to the floor. He is dead in minutes. The 
custodians watch incredulously.
The murderer is locked in a room by two other thawees. The next day a court is set up with a lawyer who 
thinks he should go free and a lawyer who asks for his death. A judge is appointed, and a jury is selected. 
Although the custodians have read of these tribal customs, they have never had an opportunity to 
experience them emotionally. It seems almost impossible that human beings could behave in this manner.
After several hours of verbal courtroom ritual, the jury labels the man "guilty," and the judge informs him 
that the group will take his life. They tie the man's hands behind his back and put a rope around his neck. 
They pull him several feet off the ground and watch self-righteously while he chokes to death.
Most of the custodians who observe this ritual become physically sick and vomit. They keep the recorders 
working, but they turn off the screen and walk outside to take deep breaths of fresh air. As they look over 
the vast Pacific Ocean, they manage to overcome their feelings of nausea at this strange spectacle of 
man's inhumanity to man. 
Acceptance of Death 
This strong reaction has not been caused by a fear of death. The people in the twenty-first century regard 
death as a natural phenomenon and accept it when it comes. They put their energy into living fully while 
they are alive. Every resource of medical science is used to keep bodies functioning, but each individual 
calls a halt when he feels that physical deterioration has gone too far. When the torch of life has burned 

brightly, they do not hesitate to pass it on to another. Each individual realizes that upon his death a new 
baby will be permitted to enter into the world. They don't fight this natural progression beyond a certain 
point. In the future immortality may be possible. But until then—no problem.
While they are breathing the fresh ocean air, Hella asks where the other frozen bodies are kept. She is 
informed they are in the Antarctic vault near the frozen animal specimens. Hella is sure that they will 
remain there for some time. Perhaps thousands of years in the future when aggressive behavior is only a 
vague, theoretical concept, an intrepid group might wish to thaw additional specimens to observe this 
phenomenon. It seems unlikely that these frozen bodies could ever be functioning citizens in a 
contemporary society. Each year the antiquated associations locked in their frozen brains become more 
and more inappropriate to the rapidly changing world. 
Hella wants to share these vivid experiences with Scott as soon as she can. Although she enjoys the 
intimate company of many men, for years her closest feelings have been toward Scott because of the 
parallel depth of intellect and feeling they share. Soon after she has recovered from the shock of 
witnessing the dual taking of life, Hella contacts Scott on the space research satellite.
"This place is busier than a frying molecule," Scott tells her. "We've been asked to find other quarters for 
our research. Since much of my work requires a cold minimum gravity area almost free of atmosphere, 
I'm moving to the moon. Labs are being installed right now. Come on up and join me." 
"It sounds wonderful," she says. "I guess my feelings are a little too tender to continue with these 
twentieth-century animals at first hand. I'd much rather read about them. If you could have seen their 
faces, Scott—the deep insecurity, the hatred, the fear in their eyes. I've got to talk to you and be close to 
you." 
Hella immediately informs the custodians of her plans. She is completely open and does not attempt to 
deceive them by saying that she has to go to the moon to help Scott set up a research station. Although 
this is true, it would be impossible for her to deal with a fellow human on any basis other than the full truth 
of her feelings. She describes her feelings and her apparent limited tolerance at this time for further 
observation of these relics from the twentieth century. Everyone understands what she is talking about. 
Were it not for their self-imposed responsibility, they would go with her. 
To the Moon 
Hella explains to Corcen her emotional need to get to the moon rapidly to be with Scott. Corcen always 
recognizes the feelings of humans and organizes the resources of the new world to meet their needs. A 
craft is diverted to pick her up within minutes. She arrives at a South American spaceport within forty 
minutes of her talk with Scott. Within six hours she is on the moon.
Although most of the structures on the moon have been built underground to simplify life-support systems 
and give protection from meteorites, there are several observation rooms above the surface. These rooms 
are formed by six-inch-thick, transparent metal domes. 

When he first sees Hella, Scott can tell that she has been through an unusual emotional experience, and 
he understands her need to talk. He obtains an observation room that is not going to be used during the 
evening. How good it feels to be together again! Although they have not missed each other—for their lives 
have been busy with fulfilling activities which they shared by teleprojection—they both feel an unusually 
keen delight in their reunion. 
They snuggle into the same living contour chair. The sides of their bodies touch warmly, unhampered by 
clothing. As they look through the glass of the observatory into the night beyond, they can see the bright 
ball of the earth a quarter-million miles away. Europe, Africa, and part of Asia are visible.
They feel toward earth as they suspect people in earlier times may have felt toward their mothers. Here is 
the organism that had brought them into being through eons of evolutionary time. 
Here is the organism that nurtured them and made them what they are. Although they can not see the 
sun, they compare their feelings about it to those that children in earlier times may have had about a 
father. The energy that moves everything in their lives may have come from the sun. Even the atoms that 
formed the earth some four billion years ago may have been an offshoot of the sun—something like the 
spermatozoa that fathers of previous times contributed to the absorbing sexual potentials of the mothers.
"I think I've learned a lot about myself and our society in the last few weeks," Hella confesses. "I had 
taken everything for granted. A person with normal vision never appreciates what his eyes mean to him. 
It's only when you come face to face with blindness that you understand the part that your eyes play in 
your life." Hella smiles a slight, tender smile."It must have been disturbing to see the folkways of the 
twentieth century," Scott says, trying to empathize with her.
"Oh, it was," answers Hella, appreciative that Scott is working toward her in his feelings. She knows she 
can always count on him. "I learned a lot, but I would never go through it again."
"I heard two people were senselessly killed, one by an individual and one by the group," says Scott. "Did 
you actually see it?"
"Yes."
"It's hard to believe such things could happen—and at the same time that I was busy on the satellite 
working to contact intelligent beings in outer space. Just think, the same world, the same time," Scott is 
beginning to feel deeply about the deaths.
Hella does not want to get into a spiral of feelings about the double murders. She feels a need to steer the 
conversation toward a deeper appreciation of what they have—to understand the present in the light of 
the past.
"When I was on the island with the thawees," Hella says, "several of them kept insisting on seeing a 
lawyer. They didn't believe me when I told them we have no use for law or lawyers. They wanted to know 
what we do with criminals. I explained that we have no criminals—that people in our society of abundance 
don't act aggressively toward others. You have to be insecure and afraid in order to harm others. They 

told me it wouldn't work—that I didn't know anything about human nature.
"I tried to explain that our supplemental brains are imprinted to make us want to seek assistance if we feel 
uncomfortable or hostile. Apparently, in their society they had to capture hostile people like wild animals. 
And just listen to this, Scott. They caged them in jails! People would voluntarily get medical help if they 
had a physical ailment, but sometimes they wouldn't get psychiatric help before they had done things that 
hurt someone."
"I suppose the thing that impressed me most deeply about them," Hella continues, "was the way they 
were driven so fiercely by their ego needs. I guess the scarcity conditions that set man against man 
accentuated the king-size egos we developed in our long evolution from the jungle. In trying to meet their 
ego needs and develop a feeling of individual worth, they got too concerned with their status in the eyes 
of others. They tried to nourish their starved egos with silly things like mink coats and diamond cuff links. 
They seemed to care less about being successful in their own terms; they were far more concerned with 
the appearance of success in the eyes of other people.
"It seems to me that one of our greatest differences lies in how we view ourselves," comments Scott, 
reflecting on the problem. "Our ancestors, at least in the twentieth century areas where these people 
came from, didn't have strong inner standards that expressed their own individuality. They were far more 
concerned with their reputations than their characters. Those poor people were like rudderless ships 
blown by winds of fashion and storms of capricious opinion."
"They just couldn't live by their own internal standards." Hella feels compassion for these people and the 
tragedy of their lost happiness. "I think this probably began with their early conditioning. Right from the 
word 'go' they were dominated by their parents. They had to do what their parents told them, or they'd be 
punished or made to feel bad. During their helpless, impressionable childhoods, they developed the habit 
of not judging and feeling things for themselves. "Moma knows best. Daddy won't like this.' The first five 
years were crucial. As they grew up, they were never free of these personality patterns."
Hella sits up quickly. "That explains why they never came into their own! Now I can see why their feelings 
always remained sharply tuned to picking up the first signs of any possible rejection that would indicate 
what to think and how to act." 
The Supreme Ethical Standard
"Of course, our present way of life is not without roots in the past," Scott says. "In ancient Greece, 
Socrates advocated our supreme ethical standard: 'Gnothi seauton,' know thyself." Scott pauses long 
enough to sit up. "And Shakespeare said, 'This above all, to thine own self be true, and it must follow, as 
the night the day, thou canst not then be false to any man.' "
"In spite of the teachings of many of the great thinkers, most of our ancestors really didn't understand 
what it means to know yourself or be true to yourself," says Hella. "These were hollow words, not a way of 
life. They were certainly not ethical guides by which people could run their lives."
"When you evolve your own standards of growth, you can feel greater worth and dignity every day," Scott 

continues intently. "Sometimes simply listening to a moving piece of music will enlarge your esthetic 
experience and make you feel you've grown. Reading will add to your store of knowledge to give this 
feeling of increased being. Simply sensing your own feelings and developing a deeper insight into the 
powers of your brain can add to the feeling of worth. When you make personal growth a way of life, a 
feeling of individual fulfillment comes automatically."
"Since our feeling of worth is within our own control," says Hella, "we have a security our ancestors 
lacked. We can give to other people in ways that they could seldom give. Our ancestors could usually be 
generous toward their immediate families. 
But they didn't have the resources to be generous toward a larger group. They had to compete too 
strongly with other people. Individuals in a larger group would hurt them and would take advantage of 
them. They had to wrestle money from them, they had to fight them for position, power, and prestige."
"You're limited in adding to the happiness of others," Scott concludes, "unless your own life is fulfilling." 
Love Without Jealousy
"In previous times there was never enough of anything— money, security, or love," Hella says. "People 
developed feelings of possessiveness. The murder I recently saw revolved around the desire of a man to 
possess a woman. He seemed to feel he owned her—that he could tell her how to live her life."
"How barbarous," says Scott. "I can't imagine anyone trying to hold love by force or threats. You hold love 
with an open palm, not a closed fist."
"Yes, but they couldn't feel that way," Hella replies. "Their jealousies were brought on by feelings of 
inferiority and insecurity. A man was afraid that if the woman he loved was with another man, she would 
find this other man more attractive and not come back to him."
"When you're with someone else, I'm glad." Scott's tone is warm. "I know you've found a relationship that 
adds to your life. When you're with me, I have the satisfying feeling that we're together simply because we 
want to be with each other. In the past if a man and woman loved each other and wanted an intimate type 
of companionship, society expected them to bind themselves with a legal arrangement called marriage. 
Of course, this was done to provide for children during their growth years. But can you imagine fettering 
love and companionship with legal rights and obligations?"
"Sounds awful. If you enjoy being with me, it's wonderful." Hella's hand touches Scott gently. "If our paths 
grow apart, we've found more satisfying relationships elsewhere. Either way, we're ahead." 
"Our open ways of feeling about each other and our ethical standard of being true to ourselves are 
perhaps the greatest social inventions of mankind," Scott philosophizes. "They could be realized only to a 
limited extent in previous societies. Only today's cybernated world can permit their full flowering. Warped 
children grow into warped adults. People who labor under an inferiority complex can't fully enter into this 
new way of feeling and acting."

"In the past," says Hella, "children spent their first five years of life under conditions that gave them a 
permanent inferiority complex. No matter how worthy they later became, no matter how learned, no 
matter how much power or skill they acquired, they always felt inferior to some extent."
"Those who struggled hardest for power, such as the Napoleons or Hitlers, were usually short men who 
had been heavily structured by the authority of their parents in their early years," adds Scott. "In an 
attempt to fight off their inferiority complex, they developed what outwardly looked like a superiority 
complex. But inside there always remained a scared little boy, insecure, trembling, and afraid someone 
would find out what he really felt. As long as people had an inferiority complex, it was impossible for them 
to get a fully secure feeling of worth based on their own inner development."
The Obscene Past
"The only thing that made me laugh while I was observing the resurrected twentieth-century people was 
their warped standards of obscenity," says Hella with a remembering smile. "One of the men had a 
drawing of a man and woman engaged in intercourse. Every woman that saw it acted shocked, and this 
seemed to give the man a perverse delight. I understand back in Victorian times a nude figure of a woman 
was considered obscene. Later, mores in Western society were revised so that only representations of 
the act of love were classified as lewd."
"Idiotic," Scott explodes. "How could a picture of one of the most beautiful experiences in life ever be 
considered obscene! A drawing might be crude, yes. It might be untalented . . ."
Hella interrupts. "We have a different way of applying the label 'obscene.' I have just witnessed the most 
obscene thing —a man hitting a woman in the face, a man turning on another person to kill him, a social 
group choking him to death with a rope." She shudders.
"Anything that degrades, debases, or dehumanizes a human being is considered obscene today," 
generalizes Scott. "Our ancestors in the twentieth century had a tremendous amount of obscenity. They 
plastered it all over their magazines, television screens, newspapers, and books. Murders, race 
prejudices, wars, etc."
"Buchenwald, Auschwitz, Dachau—ovens that devoured live, screaming human beings. Grotesque piles 
of human corpses— these are obscene things that were shown to men, women, and children in 'civilized' 
countries in the latter part of the twentieth century."
"Perhaps one of the most obscene things of all was a man in an electric chair twitching and writhing as 
the shock of electricity burned through his body," Scott grimaces. "I think the most obscene word used in 
twentieth-century America was the word 'nigger.' But few people seemed to realize it. They felt that their 
most obscene words were four-letter symbols for sexual and eliminatory acts. They wallowed in the worst 
sort of corroding filth without knowing it. They made attempts to cleanse themselves of four-letter words 
that had little to do with the human spirit." 

Separate Worlds of Men and Women
"Did the women really decorate themselves the way they appear in the old films?" Scott asks, as he 
comically pushes his hair to one side.
"You wouldn't believe how many hours they spent putting their hair in weird shapes. They painted their 
fingernails red. They painted their eyelids purple. They used chemicals to make their cheeks a light red 
and their lips a darker red. What's more, they seemed to feel better when their heels were three inches off 
the ground and their toes sharply pointed in a way that bore no resemblance to the shape of their feet. 
Both the men and women seemed obsessed with youth. They apparently felt they had been going 
downhill since the age of twenty. They did everything they could to put up a hopeless fight against aging."
"I'd hate to live with such sham, such artificiality," says Scott. "Men and women seemed to build separate 
worlds for themselves. I believe they even used separate bathrooms."
"They did," Hella agrees. "Little boys and little girls were trained in ways that were very different. A little 
girl was encouraged to be a 'young lady.' Her toys were often dolls and doll houses, furniture, and cooking 
implements. A boy was considered a sissy if he showed much interest in these things. He was given guns 
and cowboy outfits. A little girl was considered a tomboy if she ran too fast or yelled too loud. In a 
thousand subtle and not so subtle ways, a woman was molded into patterns known as 'feminine,' and a 
young boy was encouraged to be what they called 'masculine.' Since young boys and girls are neither 
masculine nor feminine, but are just human, this created stress on many individuals. Their cultural training 
kept men and women from sharing the deeper worlds of feeling. 
"Their sexual do's and don'ts were incredibly complex. Scott, they had rules about everything. Often, no 
variety was culturally permitted; you had your choice of one if you were married or none if you weren't. 
Some cultures even had laws governing the sexual positions people could use. Many societies frowned 
on women who expressed their sexual desires; it wasn't 'ladylike.' And intimate relationships with those of 
the same sex were often taboo."
"People in the twentieth-century Western culture had deeply inculcated guilt feelings which kept them 
from achieving an intense and ecstatic perfection in sexual pleasures," Scott points out. "Often a sexual 
climax was largely a shallow physical experience." 
"In a way, we care for sex both more and less than the thawees I observed." replies Hella. "It is a more 
profound experience for us. And yet if we do not have it, we are so engrossed in other dimensions of life 
that we don't miss it. It is, paradoxically, more keenly enjoyed and less keenly missed. I find that my 
sexual feelings usually become more satisfying as I get to know a person better. And yet I enjoy the 
variety of occasionally being with other men,"

Communication of Feelings
"One of the great differences between our way of life and theirs," Hella continues, "seems to He in the 
degree to which we communicate our feelings. We talk about everything. The thawees seemed ashamed 
of their feelings. They often repressed them and weren't even able to face their own feelings, much less 
the feelings of other people. They hid behind polite masks."
"Didn't Mark Twain say, 'Only the truth is good manners'?" interjects Scott.
"Even husbands and wives would go through their lives miles apart in their inner feelings," says Hella. 
"Since they were ashamed of so many of their feelings, they felt it would hurt their image to let someone 
else know how petty their feelings were. And yet the other person was tortured by motives that were 
equally petty. This stupid mutual shame seemed to keep them from talking to each other and reaching out 
to touch each other."
"I can't understand how this could have happened," says Scott. "I don't believe I've ever had a feeling that 
I was ashamed of. I've had feelings that I didn't consider desirable, but they went away as soon as I 
expressed them to someone. Because other people have always empathetically received all of the 
feelings I've ever expressed and were not threatened by them I don't believe I've ever accumulated any 
mental baggage. I live fully here and now. The dead past and the unborn future don't control me."
"I remember reading about a twentieth-century man so angry at his wife that for eighteen years he never 
spoke to her," Hella says. "They lived together and ate at the same table, but he never talked to her. 
Finally, they went to a psychiatrist, who urged the man to communicate. The first thing the husband said 
was, 'I don't want to talk about it'"
"This was extreme," Scott replies. "Few people, however, were able to express their feelings fully to any 
other human being. Sometimes a few managed to do this with counselors. But rarely were they able to do 
this with those that were nearest and dearest to them and with whom they most needed to communicate 
their feelings. Instead, they wore masks and assumed personalities they didn't have. They used words to 
hide their real selves, both from themselves and others."
"In the old competitive world," Hella points out, "it was too risky to expose one's inner thoughts. They were 
afraid that other people would judge them, would be overly helpful, would give them advice that was not 
wanted, would start diagnosing them and tearing them apart and telling them what to do, or would save 
up this information and use it against them later. It was rare to find anyone who could listen with his 
heart."
"Think of all the unhappiness that could have been prevented if they had realized that feelings can be 
managed just as automobiles and space ships can be controlled," says Scott. "They didn't realize that 
unwanted feelings are sent on their way when you talk about them. Isn't it marvelous how unpleasant 
feelings are eliminated when you fully express them, and pleasant feelings are increased when they're 
expressed!"
"Look," exclaims Hella, "we can just begin to see the Americas!"

As Scott looks toward the bright earth suspended above their horizon, he is aware of a gentle reflected 
light that outlines their figures. The broad Atlantic Ocean is stippled by light patches, these must be large 
areas covered by clouds. Could that tiny white dot above the earth be the space research satellite? It's 
hard to tell. But the backlighting on Hella's breast that stops just above the nipple is beautiful. 
The New Character
"I believe I've developed a much deeper appreciation of our culture," says Hella. "Our satisfaction and 
happiness lie within our own control. We may never approach our ideals of self-knowledge and self-
development, but we can make continual and satisfying, day-by-day, minute-by-minute progress. This is 
what we need to have a meaningful life. We live broad, wide lives with an enormous range of interests. 
Our world is so large."
"We're closer, both to ourselves and to others," says Scott, "Somehow without giving up our own 
individuality, we seem to develop at the same time a deeper and more profound relationship with others. 
The more we find ourselves, the more we transcend the boundaries of our own egos. We give more of 
ourselves in our emotional relationships with other people, and, yet, we also retain a deeper ability to live 
by our own standards and to remain the masters of ourselves."
"In previous centuries togetherness meant a giving up of individuality rather than a strengthening of it."
"Yes, I know what you mean, Hella. We enhance our togetherness and reinforce our individuality at the 
same time. It sounds contradictory, but it isn't."
"I think it's our ability to communicate with each other that enables us to be intellectually and emotionally 
naked—to have no pretenses," Hella reflects."I guess that's one reason we enjoy being physically naked, 
too. We feel completely loved and completely secure. We have no need to hide, either from ourselves or 
others."
Hella pauses and drops her head back to rest on Scott's arm.
"And our love is not motivated by need. We do not love just to make up for a deficiency in ourselves. 
When we offer love, it is as a gift—a kind of spontaneous reaching out."
Scott feels that Hella's mood is changing. There are longer pauses. She is watching the earth, the 
satellites, and the stars. She has obviously shared with him the vibrant thoughts that have filled her as a 
result of her experiences in the past weeks. 
He feels her hand on his chest. He turns his head toward her. She is looking straight into his eyes. He has 
accepting feelings of love. The universe is cold and objective, but the bits of space and time that contain 
human beings are filled with warmth, security, and affection.
"So there's life in other parts of the universe. Well, good!" says Scott. "How could it be better than life right 
here!"

PART III. Looking Forward 
16. Education for Change
We don't view our projection of the twenty-first century as a final blueprint, and you shouldn't either. It will 
serve its purpose if it gets intelligent people thinking about these problems. We hope you can improve our 
projection of future goals and the ways by which they may be achieved.
"We are now at the point," said anthropologist Margaret Mead, "where we must educate people in what 
nobody knew yesterday and prepare in our schools for what no one knows yet, but what some people 
must know tomorrow." Perhaps never in the history of mankind has it been so important that we know 
where we're going and how to get there. Humanity is no longer running- a two-bit show. There are over 
3,000,000,000 people in the world today. We will soon be able to start a nuclear war that could wipe out 
all human life. Even ignoring the nuclear threat, it will take global organization of a high order to provide a 
good life for all humans. Freedom from war and want is at last within our grasp. But it won't happen 
automatically. We must use our heads and our hearts.
Scientific, political, industrial, economic, and sociological changes are occurring at a pace more rapid 
today than ever before in history. Some people have wished that things would slow down so we could 
have more time to adjust to change. This, of course, won't happen. Many are opposing changes simply 
because they are changes. They are nostalgically and frantically holding on to the "wisdom" of the past. 
But in times of rapid change, the "wisdom" of the past is usually of little help in meeting the problems of 
the present. 
W. H. Ferry of the Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions has advised us that we should hardly be 
surprised by the changes that lie ahead:
Aristotle foresaw a takeover by machines 2000 years ago. The possibility of a workless or nearly workless 
society emerging from technology is part of our literature. H. G. Wells told his readers about it 50 years  
ago. Forty years ago, C. H. Douglas wrote: 'We can produce at this moment goods and services at a rate  
very considerably greater than the possible rate of consumption, and this production and delivery of 
goods can, under favorable circumstances, be achieved by the employment of not more than 25 per cent  
of the available labor working, let us say, seven hours a day.' Olaf Stapledon and Stuart Chase, in very 
different ways, told us the same story 30 years ago. Jacques Ellul in The Technological Society, just 
published, says, 'By the end of the 19th Century people saw in their grasp the moment in which  
everything would be at the disposal of everyone, in which man, replaced by the machines would have  
only pleasures and play.' In a neglected report of December 1963, the Research Institute of America 
anticipated the Committee when it remarked: 
'The moment of truth on automation is coming—a lot sooner than most people realize. .The 
shattering fact is that the U.S. is still almost totally unprepared for the approaching crisis.'*

* W. H. Ferry, "Further Reflections on the Triple Revolution," Fellowship, January, 1965.
It seems incredible that any intelligent man can view with complacency the slowness with which we are 
changing to meet the challenge of the world that lies ahead of us. Dandridge M. Cole has pointed out that, 
"It has already been noted that technical knowledge is doubling every seven years (the doubling 
time is decreasing), and that ninety percent of all the scientists who ever lived are alive right now.  
Without assuming any reduction in doubling time it can be estimated that our total of technical  
knowledge in fifty years will exceed the present level by a factor of 27 or 256."* 
*Dandridge M. Cole, Beyond Tomorrow (Amherst, Wisconsin: Amherst Press, 1965), pp. 87-90.
"In the past most individuals were able to go through life with the set of attitudes and beliefs appropriate to 
the age in which they were brought up," wrote Robert Theobald:
The rate of change in science, in technology, in the beliefs and ideals of man was sufficiently slow to  
ensure that they remained relatively appropriate. Even then the older generation expressed its 
dissatisfaction in the phrase: 'I don't know what the world is coming to.' Nowadays it is recognized  
that the attitudes appropriate to the beginning of the twenty-first century will be totally different from  
those now accepted, but little attempt is made to look ahead. Indeed, much education is based on  
the ideas of past scholars; as a result theories are taught to generations of students long after they  
have been recognized by the leaders in the field of study to be incorrect.**
**Robert Theobald, The Rich and the Poor (New York: Clarkson N. Potter, Inc., 1960), pp. 139-140.
Every kindergarten, elementary school, high school, and college in the nation should help students 
anticipate the changes that lie in their future. It should challenge them to seek new ways of thinking and 
feeling—of reorganizing their society to make the most of man's potential for happiness in the new age. 
Instead, most of our public and private schools prepare the students to live with the values and folkways 
of our ancestors. 
Ready or Not
Ready or not, we are rapidly launching into a period of tremendous change. This is obvious on a 
technological level with satellites orbiting the earth, color television in our homes, and the government 
computers checking up on our income tax. But we are just now beginning an era in which social change 
must keep pace with technological change. The social patterns which we have inherited from ancient 
Mesopotamia will not give us happiness in the world of the future. The turmoil, insecurity, unhappiness, 
and conflict that are experienced today will increase unbearably if we are slow in inventing new ways of 
living, thinking, and feeling. Humanity is now entering into its adolescent phase. If we're going to come 
through our teen years without too many scars, the human race had better learn how to mature. 

Perhaps the greatest threat that faces us at this moment is the fragmentation of humanity into over 100 
egocentric national boundary lines. These paranoid nationalities claim the sovereign right to use weapons 
that can kill millions of people in other countries. If we continue improving our atomic weapons for another 
twenty years, it is possible that a flare-up of a dictator's temper could bring on a chain of events that 
would wipe out every human being. 
No one can predict the future with certainty. One thing, however, seems highly probable. Things are 
moving so fast that in a hundred years our society will bear little resemblance to the economic, social, and 
political patterns of today. We suggest that whatever the future brings, it will represent a pattern spun out 
by the "Life, Liberty, and the Pursuit of Happiness" value structure, the scientific method as a thinking 
technique, and the cornucopia flowing from automated and computerized tools. 
The future holds great stress and threat to individuals who do not have flexible nervous systems. It also 
offers a limitless challenge to those who can use their intelligence for its primary evolutionary function: to 
adapt to changing conditions. Greater wisdom, fantastic accomplishments, and enormously increased 
happiness may be ours in the humanistic, scientific, cybernated world of tomorrow. 
Your Participation Is Needed
"In world leaders and individual citizens alike," advises Dr. Robert M. Hutchins,
"old habits and customs stand in the way of adaptation to a new world. We are only beginning to study  
these habits and customs, to seek new ways of using our intelligence in order to preserve the species. In 
this effort the best thinking of every man and woman is needed."* 
*Change, (Santa Barbara, California: Center for the Study of Democratic Institutions, February,  
1965), Vol. 1, No. 1, p. 1.
Dr. George Gallup in The Miracle Ahead points out that we can not rely on our economic and political 
leaders to help us respond dynamically to the challenge of the future. Dr. Gallup suggests: 
. . . change can not be brought about easily by its leaders, except in those situations in which the 
changes advocated do not disturb present relationships. In fact, it is the leaders who typically 
become the most bitter and the most effective foes of change. The public, therefore, must take the  
initiative and assume responsibility for progress in the affairs of man. The public must force change 
upon its leaders.** 
** George Gallup, The Miracle Ahead (New York, Evanston, and London: Harper & Row, 1964), p.  
201.

In the history of man, no generation has been educated to expect social change and creatively adapt to it. 
In a very real sense we back into the future hoping we don't get our behinds chewed off. We eagerly seek 
new medicines for our physical ailments even before these have been thoroughly tested. But when it 
comes to political, social, and economic changes upon which so much of our happiness depends, our 
guiding philosophy seems to be, "Don't rock the boat." Well, the boat is rocking, and it's going to remain 
rocking for a long time. The only way to stop the boat from rocking is to use the scientific method of 
thinking to guide us to social inventions that really work.
No one today has all the answers—or even the questions. But by means of careful experimentation and 
measurement of results, we can eventually determine what political, economic, and social changes will 
give humanity freedom from war and want and will enable all people to live a more satisfying life.
For the first time in the history of man we can redesign both ourselves and our entire environment! By 
manipulating our genes, we will be able to change the structure and function of our bodily organs in 
almost any way that we desire. With a cybernated technology based on nuclear power, we can redesign 
our living areas, our cities, and our planet. And even the sky is not the limit. Eventually, the mind of a man 
might profoundly change the planets of our solar system. Our galaxy and possibly the nebulae beyond 
may feel our touch. Our only limitations are our intelligence and our creative imagination. Man may now 
control his destiny! 
Every intelligent citizen on this globe should be pondering these uncharted seas on which the ship of 
humanity is now plunging ahead at full speed. Like Columbus, who set out on a daring voyage about a 
half-millennium ago, we have only a few scraps of information plus our scientific and humanistic 
intelligence to guide us. We must use these to the best of our ability to avoid the hell of atomic war. We 
must somehow land ourselves on a new shore where men and women may find themselves, where 
blighted personality development will become the exception rather than the norm, where man's 
inhumanity to man will be unknown, and where wars and want will be but a distant memory. Only then will 
the spirit of man soar to its full, wonderful potential. 